A novel gene has been characterized, designated C16orf5, with an unusually high content of proline residues (40% over 104 residues) at the N-terminus of the protein. The C-terminus of the protein is also cysteine rich with 14 cysteine residues present. Analysis using Northern and dot blots showed that the highest expression of this gene is in the brain. The gene was located on chromosome 16 at band p13.3 by FISH to metaphase chromosomes. Southern blot analysis with a human-rodent somatic cell hybrid panel showed a location between the somatic hybrid breakpoints 23HA and CY196. This gene comprises at least four exons and an open reading frame of 786 bp encoding a predicted protein of 261 amino acids. Analysis of this protein using PSORTII predicted a nuclear localization.
TNFα is a pleiotropic cytokine that signals for both survival and apoptotic cell fates. It is still unclear that the dual role of TNFα can be regulated in cancer cells. We previously described an apoptotic pathway involving p53→CDIP→TNFα that was activated in response to genotoxic stress. This pathway operated in the presence of JNK activation; therefore, we postulated that CDIP itself could sensitize cells to a TNFα apoptotic cell fate, survival, or death. We show that CDIP mediates sensitivity to TNFα-induced apoptosis and that cancer cells with endogenous CDIP expression are inherently sensitive to the growth-suppressive effects of TNFα in vitro and in vivo. Thus, CDIP expression correlates with sensitivity of cancer cells with TNFα, and CDIP seems to be a regulator of the p53-mediated death versus survival response of cells to TNFα. This CDIP-mediated sensitivity to TNFα-induced apoptosis favors pro- over antiapoptotic program in cancer cells, and CDIP may serve as a predictive biomarker for such sensitivity.
We have identified a novel pro-apoptotic p53 target gene named CDIP (Cell Death Involved p53-target). Inhibition of CDIP abrogates p53-mediated apoptotic responses, demonstrating that CDIP is an important p53 apoptotic effector. CDIP itself potently induces apoptosis that is associated with caspase-8 cleavage, implicating the extrinsic cell death pathway in apoptosis mediated by CDIP. siRNA-directed knockdown of caspase-8 results in a severe impairment of CDIP-dependent cell death. In investigating the potential involvement of extrinsic cell death pathway in CDIP-mediated apoptosis, we found that TNF-alpha expression tightly correlates with CDIP expression, and that inhibition of TNF-alpha signaling attenuates CDIP-dependent apoptosis. We also demonstrate that TNF-alpha is upregulated in response to p53 and p53 inducing genotoxic stress, in a CDIP-dependent manner. Consistently, knockdown of TNF-alpha impairs p53-mediated stress-induced apoptosis. Together, these findings support a novel p53 --> CDIP --> TNF-alpha apoptotic pathway that directs apoptosis after exposure of cells to genotoxic stress. Thus, CDIP provides a new link between p53-mediated intrinsic and death receptor-mediated extrinsic apoptotic signaling, providing a novel target for cancer therapeutics aimed at maximizing the p53 apoptotic response of cancer cells to drug therapy.
The amyloid cascade hypothesis is well known hypothesis describing the pathogenesis of Alzheimer's disease (AD). On the basis of this hypothesis, inhibition of amyloid beta-protein (Abeta) generation and aggregation, enhancement of extracellular Abeta removal, and Abeta vaccination are currently under investigation. Intracellular Abeta may be even more important than extracellular Abeta, since intraneuronal Abeta accumulation commonly precedes extracellular Abeta deposition in several familial AD-related mutant presenilin 1-transgenic mice. Various pathogenic mechanisms involving intracellular Abeta such as mitochondrial toxicity, proteasome impairment and synaptic damage have been suggested. Recently, we have reported that cytosolic Abeta42 accumulation leads to p53 mRNA expression and p53-related apoptosis. It was also reported that a novel chaperone protein, Abeta-related death-inducing protein (AB-DIP), regulates nuclear localization of intracellular Abeta42. Therefore, intraneuronal Abeta represents an alternative therapeutic target. While inhibition of Abeta production and anti-Abeta immunotherapies are likely to attenuate both intraneuronal and extracellular Abeta toxicity, more specific anti-intraneuronal Abeta therapies should be useful. The focus of this article is to review the pathogenic mechanisms involving intracellular Abeta and advocate intracellular Abeta as an important therapeutic target in AD.
Chimeric tumor suppressor-1 (CTS-1) is based on the sequence of p53 and was designed as a therapeutic tool resisting various mechanisms of p53 inactivation. We previously reported that an adenovirus expressing CTS-1 (Ad-CTS-1) has superior cell death-inducing activity in glioma cells compared with wild-type p53. Here, we used cDNA microarrays to detect changes in gene expression preferentially induced by Ad-CTS-1. The putative serine threonine kinase, PCTAIRE3, and the quinone oxireductase, PIG3, were strongly induced by Ad-CTS-1 compared with wild-type p53. An adenoviral vector encoding PCTAIRE3 (Ad-PCTAIRE3) induced growth arrest and killed a minor proportion of the glioma cells. Ad-PIG3 alone affected neither growth nor viability. However, coinfection with Ad-PCTAIRE3 and Ad-PIG3 resulted in enhanced growth inhibition compared with Ad-PCTAIRE3 infection alone. Ad-CTS1, Ad-PCTAIRE3 or Ad-PIG3 induced the formation of free reactive oxygen species (ROS). However, the prevention of ROS formation induced by Ad-PCTAIRE3 and Ad-CTS-1 did not block growth arrest and cell death, suggesting that ROS formation is not essential for these effects. Altogether, these data identify PCTAIRE3 as one novel growth-inhibitory and death-inducing p53 response gene and suggest that changes in the expression of specific target genes contribute to the superior anti-glioma activity of CTS-1.
Resolved endoplasmic reticulum (ER) stress response is essential for intracellular homeostatic balance, but unsettled ER stress can lead to apoptosis. Here, we show that a proapoptotic p53 target, CDIP1, acts as a key signal transducer of ER-stress-mediated apoptosis. We identify B-cell-receptor-associated protein 31 (BAP31) as an interacting partner of CDIP1. Upon ER stress, CDIP1 is induced and enhances an association with BAP31 at the ER membrane. We also show that CDIP1 binding to BAP31 is required for BAP31 cleavage upon ER stress and for BAP31-Bcl-2 association. The recruitment of Bcl-2 to the BAP31-CDIP1 complex, as well as CDIP1-dependent truncated Bid (tBid) and caspase-8 activation, contributes to BAX oligomerization. Genetic knockout of CDIP1 in mice leads to impaired response to ER-stress-mediated apoptosis. Altogether, our data demonstrate that the CDIP1/BAP31-mediated regulation of mitochondrial apoptosis pathway represents a mechanism for establishing an ER-mitochondrial crosstalk for ER-stress-mediated apoptosis signaling.
No quantitative data currently exist on the relationship of the occurrence of cartilage degeneration and changes in site-specific biomechanical properties in the metacarpophalangeal (MCP) joint in the horse.
To gain insight into the biomechanical consequences of cartilage deterioration at 2 differently loaded sites on the proximal articular surface of the proximal phalanx (P1).
Static and dynamic stiffness of articular cartilage decreases significantly in degenerated cartilage.
Cartilage degeneration index (CDI) values were measured at the lateral dorsal margin (Site 1), lateral central fovea (Site 2) and entire joint surface of P1 (CDIP1) in 30 horses. Group 1 contained joints without (CDIP1 values <25 %, n = 22) and Group 2 joints with (CDIP1 values >25 %, n = 8) signs of cartilage degeneration. Cartilage thickness at Sites 1 and 2 was measured using ultrasonic and needle-probe techniques. Osteochondral plugs were drilled out from Sites 1 and 2 and subsequently tested biomechanically in indentation geometry. Young's modulus at equilibrium and dynamic modulus were determined.
Cartilage thickness values were not significantly different between the 2 groups and sites. Young's modulus at Site 1 was significantly higher in Group 1 than in Group 2; at Site 2, the difference was not significant. Dynamic modulus values were significantly higher in Group 1 than in Group 2 at both sites.
Degenerative cartilage changes are clearly related to loss of stiffness of the tissue. Absolute changes in cartilage integrity in terms of CDI are greatest at the joint margin, but concomitant changes are also present at the centre, with a comparable decrease of the biomechanical moduli at the 2 sites. Therefore, significant cartilage degradation at the joint margin not only reflects local deterioration of biomechanical properties, but is also indicative of the functional quality in the centre.
These findings may be important for improving prognostication and developing preventative measures.
There are many noninvasive diagnostic methods used for evaluating chronic progressive joint disease, but each has severe limitations in the detection of early articular cartilage damage.
To evaluate the accuracy of arthroscopy as a diagnostic method for the assessment of the severity of cartilage surface damage on the proximal articular margin of the equine first phalanx (P1).
That arthroscopic assessment of the visible cartilage provides 1) a good indication of the integrity of the cartilage surface and 2) a good estimation of the status of the cartilage surface of the entire articular area of P1.
Arthroscopic examination of the dorsal pouch of the metacarpophalangeal joint was performed in the left front limbs of 74 slaughter horses (age 5 months to 23 years). The appearance of the visible cartilage of P1 was scored by 2 independent arthroscopists, using the SFA arthroscopic grading system. The joints were dissected after completion of the arthroscopic procedure. The cartilage degeneration index (CDIP1) was determined and used as a quantitative measure for the overall degree of cartilage surface deterioration on the articular area of P1. Further, CDI values were determined for the dorsal articular margin of P1 (CDIdam), i.e. the area that can be visualised with arthroscopy. The CDIdam values were classified into 3 groups (CDIdam<25%, minor lesions; 25%<CDIdam<45%, moderate lesions; and CDIdam>45%, severe lesions). Differences between the 2 arthroscopists were evaluated statistically in a nonparametric test and Pearson correlation coefficients (r) with matching P values were determined for the correlations between SFA and CDIdam and between CDIP1 and CDIdam. The level of significance was set at P<0.05.
Differences between SFA scores of the 2 arthroscopists were not significant (P = 0.22). In the group of joints with minor cartilage changes, there was no correlation between SFA and CDIdam (r = 0.12; P = 0.71), but there was a significant correlation between CDIP1 and CDIdam (r = 0.95; P<0.01). In the group with moderate cartilage damage, there was an increase in correlation between SFA and CDIdam (r = 0.27; P = 0.09) and a decrease in the correlation between CDIP1 and CDIdam (r = 0.48; P<0.01). In the group with severe cartilage changes, there was a significant correlation between SFA and CDIdam (r = 058; P<0.01), but no significant correlation between CDIP1 and CDIdam (r = 0.43; P = 0.06).
Arthroscopic assessment of cartilage lesions on the proximal articular surface of P1 in joints with minor cartilage damage leads to an underestimation of the actual damage because proteoglycan depletion and light cartilage fibrillation cannot be detected arthroscopically. In cases with mild cartilage damage, the status of the cartilage surface of the visible area of P1 is a good representation of the status of the entire articular surface. In cases with severe cartilage lesions, there is an overestimation of real damage. In such joints, the arthroscopic scoring system provides reliable information, but the visible area is not representative of the entire articular surface.
From a practical viewpoint, it can be stated that the arthroscopic grading of visible lesions on the equine P1 gives the best impression of overall cartilage damage in joints with moderately severe cartilage lesions. It should be realised, however, that this is the result of an underestimation due to the shortcomings of the grading system, which is neutralised by an overestimation due to the fact that the severity of lesions on the visible area of P1 is not representative for the entire articular surface.
In the genetic sex determination of vertebrates, the gonadal sex depends on the combination of sex chromosomes that a zygote possesses. Despite the discovery of the sex-determining gene (SRY/Sry) in mammals in 1990, the sex-determining gene in non-mammalian vertebrates remained an enigma for over a decade. In most mammals, the male-inducing master sex-determining gene is located on the Y chromosome and is therefore absent from XX females. A second sex-determining gene, Dmy, was described in the Oryzias latipes in 2002 and has a DNA-binding motif that is different from the motif in the mammalian sex-determining gene SRY or Sry. Dmy is also located on the Y chromosome and is therefore absent in XX females. Seven other sex-determining genes, including candidate genes, are now known in birds, a frog species, and 5 fish species. These findings over the past twenty years have increased our knowledge of sex-determining genes and sex chromosomes among vertebrates. Here, we review recent advances in our understanding of sex-determining genes and genetic sex determination systems in fish, especially those of the Oryzias species, which are described in detail. The facts suggest some patterns of how new sex-determining genes emerged and evolved. We believe that these facts are common not only in Oryzias but also in other fish species. This knowledge will help to elucidate the conserved mechanisms from which various sex-determining mechanisms have evolved.
Sex determination in mammals requires expression of the Y-linked gene Sry in the bipotential genital ridges of the XY embryo. Even minor delay of the onset of Sry expression can result in XY sex reversal, highlighting the need for accurate gene regulation during sex determination. However, the location of critical regulatory elements remains unknown. Here, we analysed Sry flanking sequences across many species, using newly available genome sequences and computational tools, to better understand Sry's genomic context and to identify conserved regions predictive of functional roles.
Flanking sequences from 17 species were analysed using both global and local sequence alignment methods. Multiple motif searches were employed to characterise common motifs in otherwise unconserved sequence.
We identified position-specific conservation of binding motifs for multiple transcription factor families, including GATA binding factors and Oct/Sox dimers. In contrast with the landscape of extremely low sequence conservation around the Sry coding region, our analysis highlighted a strongly conserved interval of ~106 bp within the Sry promoter (which we term the Sry Proximal Conserved Interval, SPCI). We further report that inverted repeats flanking murine Sry are much larger than previously recognised.
The unusually fast pace of sequence drift on the Y chromosome sharpens the likely functional significance of both the SPCI and the identified binding motifs, providing a basis for future studies of the role(s) of these elements in Sry regulation.
The aim of this study was to modulate the cationicity of chitosan to influence the mesenchymal stem cell (MSC) responses in terms of cell adhesion, proliferation, and differentiation. The authors prepared water-soluble carboxymethyl chitosan hydrogels using genipin as the crosslinking agent. The chitosan cationicity was modulated by varying the genipin content from 0.5 to 10 wt. %. The results indicated that the cationicity exerted a striking modulation effect on various MSC responses. The increase of the genipin content, i.e., decrease of the free amino group content (cationicity), overall promoted the MSC adhesion, cytoskeleton organization, proliferation, and differentiation into the osteogenic lineage. A surprising cell alignment effect was also observed on chitosan samples with high genipin concentrations (>2.5%). The chitosan sample with the highest genipin concentrations (10%) exhibited the best MSC proliferation and highest protein expression levels toward osteogenic lineages. The genipin content also showed a strong modulation effect on MSC condensation, and cell-cell and cell-matrix interactions, as suggested by the expressions of the sry related HMG box9 (Sox9), intercellular adhesion molecule 1, and N-Cadherin. Overall, the authors have demonstrated that modulation of cationicity (amino content) of chitosan is an effective and simple approach to tuning various MSC responses, including adhesion, proliferation, differentiation, as well as cell-cell interactions. Such findings might have important implications in biomaterial design for various biomedical applications.
Although the disorder of sex development in dogs with female karyotype (XX DSD) is quite common, its molecular basis is still unclear. Among mutations underlying XX DSD in mammals are duplication of a long sequence upstream of the SOX9 gene (RevSex) and duplication of the SOX9 gene (also observed in dogs). We performed a comparative analysis of 16 XX DSD and 30 control female dogs, using FISH and MLPA approaches. Our study was focused on a region harboring SOX9 and a region orthologous to the human RevSex (CanRevSex), which was located by in silico analysis downstream of SOX9. Two highly polymorphic copy number variable regions (CNVRs): CNVR1 upstream of SOX9 and CNVR2 encompassing CanRevSex were identified. Although none of the detected copy number variants were specific to either affected or control animals, we observed that the average number of copies in CNVR1 was higher in XX DSD. No copy variation of SOX9 was observed. Our extensive studies have excluded duplication of SOX9 as the common cause of XX DSD in analyzed samples. However, it remains possible that the causative mutation is hidden in highly polymorphic CNVR1.
Since the available concentration of single-copy fetal genes in maternal blood DNA is sometimes lower than detection limits by PCR methods, the development of specific and quantitative PCR detection methods for fetal DNA in maternal blood is anticipated, which may broaden the methods that can be used to monitor pregnancy. We used the TaqMan qPCR amplification for DYS14 multi-copy sequence and the SRY gene in maternal blood plasma (cell-free DNA) and fractional precipitated blood cells (cellular DNA) from individual cynomolgus monkeys at 22 weeks of pregnancy. The availability of cell-free fetal DNA was higher in maternal blood plasma than that of cellular DNA from fractional precipitated blood cells. There was a significantly higher (P < 0.001) mean copy number of fetal male DYS14 from maternal plasma (4.4 × 10(4) copies/mL) than that of detected fetal cellular DNA from fractional blood cell pellets. The sensitivity of the DYS14 PCR assay was found to be higher than that of the SRY assay for the detection of fetal DNA when its presence was at a minimum. The DYS14 assay is an improved method for quantifying male fetal DNA in circulating maternal blood in the primate model.
A single-born, 15-month-old Holstein cattle, diagnosed as hermaphrodite, was investigated for estrous cycle, hormonal profiles, karyotype, presence of SRY, as well as anatomopathological and histological aspects. Normal continuous estrous cycles and basal testosterone levels were reported. Necropsy showed the presence of a female genital tract that mismatched a vulvar opening and a male pelvic urethra continued within a penis. Moreover, we observed islands of seminiferous tubules with the presence of germline cells, 2 pampiniform plexi, the corpus cavernosum, the penile urethra, the corpus spongiosum and the glans. Cytogenetic analyses of the blood cells showed an XX karyotype, while the molecular analyses revealed the presence of the SRY gene in several tissues, including blood. This is the first report in the scientific literature of an SRY-positive hermaphrodite Holstein cattle with continuous ovarian cycles.
Gonadal sex in most mammals is determined based on sex differentiation of the supporting cell lineages. In mouse XY gonads, SRY induces SOX9 upregulation and subsequent FGF9 expression by embryonic day 11.5 (E11.5), leading to the differentiation of Sertoli cells. XX gonads, lacking SRY action, start on the ovarian program through the actions of WNT4 and FOXL2 from around E11.5-12.0. These 2 ovarian factors, together with retinoic acid (RA) action, promote feminization partially through the repression of the masculinizing activities of SOX9, FGF9 and DMRT1. RA initiates meiosis in female germ cell cysts, in which intercellular bridges between interconnected germ cells rapidly undergo cyst breakdown by E17.5. Ovarian morphogenesis is characterized by continuous recruitment of pre-granulosa progenitor cells from the coelomic epithelia during the embryonic stage, which results in the formation of ovigerous cords and tight packing of non-interconnected oocytes (i.e. oocyte nests) at the perinatal stages. At birth, the oocyte nests break down into single oocytes surrounded by granulosa cells, leading to the assembly of primordial follicles. This review focuses on recent advances in the molecular and cellular events of initial ovarian differentiation, meiotic initiation, germ cell nest breakdown, and primordial follicle formation based on anatomical and morphogenetic aspects.
Consequences of obstructive nephropathy include tissue fibrosis, a major pathophysiological mechanism contributing to development of end-stage renal disease. Transforming growth factor β 1 (Tgfβ1) is involved in the progression of renal fibrosis. According to recent observations, ammonium chloride (NH4Cl) prevented phosphate-induced vascular remodeling, effects involving decrease of Tgfβ1 expression and inhibition of Tgfβ1-dependent signaling. The present study, thus, explored whether NH4Cl influences renal Tgfβ1-induced pro-fibrotic signaling in obstructive nephropathy induced by unilateral ureteral obstruction (UUO).
UUO was induced for seven days in C57Bl6 mice with or without additional treatment with NH4Cl (0.28 M in drinking water). Transcript levels were determined by RT-PCR as well as protein abundance by Western blotting, blood pH was determined utilizing a blood gas and chemistry analyser.
UUO increased renal mRNA expression of Tgfb1, Tgfβ-activated kinase 1 (Tak1) protein abundance and Smad2 phosphorylation in the nuclear fraction of the obstructed kidney tissues, effects blunted in NH4Cl treated mice as compared to control treated mice. The mRNA levels of the transcription factors nuclear factor of activated T cells 5 (Nfat5) and SRY (sex determining region Y)-box 9 (Sox9) as well as of tumor necrosis factor α (Tnfα), interleukin 6 (Il6), plasminogen activator inhibitor 1 (Pai1) and Snai1 were up-regulated in the obstructed kidney tissues following UUO, effects again significantly ameliorated following NH4Cl treatment. Furthermore, the increased protein and mRNA expression of α-smooth muscle actin (α-Sma), fibronectin and collagen type I in the obstructed kidney tissues following UUO were significantly attenuated following NH4Cl treatment.
NH4Cl treatment ameliorates Tgfβ1-dependent pro-fibrotic signaling and renal tissue fibrosis markers following obstructive nephropathy.
Haemophilia A (HA) is the most severe sex-linked bleeding disorder that is characterized with non-controlled and often threatening Haemorrhage. Routine fetal sex determination in early pregnancy with Haemophilia is based on invasive procedures that can be dangerous to the mother and fetus.
The goal of this study is to present an improved assay for the non-invasive fetal sex determination using a Real-Time duplex PCR on the free fetal DNA (ffDNA) obtained from the maternal serum of the HA carriers.
Blood samples were eventually collected from 23 pregnant HA carriers between the 8(th) and 12(th) weeks of gestation, and after amplification by duplex-PCR of the single copy of Y chromosome-specific sequence (SRY), the product was then subjected to Real-Time PCR analysis.
Data were compared with the outcome of chorionic villus sampling (CVS) and indicated that the SRY sequence was detected in 6 of 6 serum samples from male pregnancies and that sequence was absent in 9 samples where the fetus was female. The remaining samples determined without having the CVS positive samples.
We tried to develop a Real-Time duplex PCR for accurate diagnosis of fetal gender early in the pregnancy of HA carriers. This study has brought up two remarkable points, the first is the method's improvement with high specificity in sex determination, especially in screening of prenatal sex-linked disorders in male gender and the second is that fresh serum samples would be a good source for this purpose, advocated by similar studies carried out in this regard.
The immunoglobulin E (IgE)-associated locus on human chromosome 13q14 influencing asthma-related traits contains the genes PHF11 and SETDB2. SETDB2 is located in the same linkage disequilibrium region as PHF11 and polymorphisms within SETDB2 have been shown to associate with total serum IgE levels. In this report, we sequenced the 15 exons of SETDB2 and identified a single previously ungenotyped mutation (AT/G, rs386770867) in the 5'-untranslated region of the gene. The polymorphism was found to be significantly associated with serum IgE levels in our asthma cohort (P=0.0012). Electrophoretic mobility shift assays revealed that the transcription factor Ying Yang 1 binds to the AT allele, whereas SRY (Sex determining Region Y) binds to the G allele. Allele-specific transcription analysis (allelotyping) was performed in 35 individuals heterozygous for rs386770867 from a panel of 200 British families ascertained through probands with severe stage 3 asthma. The AT allele was found to be significantly overexpressed in these individuals (P=1.26 × 10(-21)). A dual-luciferase assay with the pGL3 luciferase reporter gene showed that the AT allele significantly affects transcriptional activities. Our results indicate that the IgE-associated AT/G polymorphism (rs386770867) regulates transcription of SETDB2.Genes and Immunity advance online publication, 17 September 2015; doi:10.1038/gene.2015.36.
MicroRNAs (miRNAs) are a class of short non-coding RNAs that pave a new avenue for understanding immune responses and cancer progression. Although the miRNAs are involved in breast cancer development, their axis with the transcription factors that show therapeutic potential in breast cancer is largely unknown. Previous studies showed anti-metastatic roles of agonist-activated aryl hydrocarbon receptor (Ahr) in various breast cancer cell lines. Recently, we demonstrated that agonist-activated Ahr induced a highly conserved miRNA cluster, named miR-212/132, in murine cellular immune compartment. Therefore, current study was performed to examine if this miRNA cluster mediates the anti-metastatic properties of Ahr agonists.
The expression of miR-212/132 cluster and coding genes were examined by real-time PCR, and the protein levels were detected by western blot. The 2,3,7,8-tetrachlorodibenzo-p-dioxin (TCDD) and 3,3'-diindolylmethane (DIM) were used to activate Ahr in MDA-MB-231 and T47D breast cancer cells. Chromatin immunoprecipitation (ChIP) assay was used to identify the binding site(s) for Ahr on miR-212/132 promoter. For prediction of potentially target gene of the miRNA cluster, bioinformatics analysis was carried out, and to test targeting, luciferase activity was quantified. Besides, biological effects of Ahr-miR-212/132 axis were examined in vitro by cell migration, expansion and invasion, and examined in vivo by orthotopic model of spontaneous metastasis.
The miR-212/132 cluster was transcriptionally activated in MDA-MB-231 and T47D cells by TCDD and DIM, and this activation was regulated by Ahr. A reciprocal correlation was identified between Ahr agonists-induced miR-212/132 and the pro-metastatic SRY-related HMG-box4 (SOX4), and a new specific binding sites for miR-212/132 were identified on the untranslated region (3'UTR) of SOX4. Interestingly, miR-212/132 over-expression showed direct anti-migration, anti-expansion and anti-invasion properties, and an inhibition of the miRNA cluster mitigated the anti-invasive properties of TCDD and DIM. Further in vivo studies demonstrated that the Ahr-miR-212/132-SOX4 module was induced by Ahr activation.
Taken together, the findings provide the first evidences of the synergistic anti-metastatic properties of miR-212/132 cluster through suppression of SOX4. Also, current study suggest a new miRNA-based mechanism elucidating the anti-metastatic properties of Ahr agonists, suggesting possibility of using miR-212/132 to control metastasis in breast cancer patients.
The transcription factor sex determining region (Y SRY)-box 2 (SOX2) is known to play a crucial role in the maintenance of self renewal or pluripotency of undifferentiated embryonic and neuronal stem cells. An elevated expression of SOX2 has been correlated with poor prognosis of esophageal squamous cell carcinoma (ESCC). We sought to investigate the mechanism(s) by which SOX2 modulates the ESCC metastasis. The SOX2 coding DNA sequence was inserted into pCMV vector and stably transfected in ESCC cells (Eca-109). The effect of SOX2 over expression was evaluated on cell migration, invasion and epithelial to mesenchymal transition (EMT). We also measured the expression of Slug to explore if this transcription factor is involved in SOX2-mediated regulation of cell migration/invasion and EMT. In addition, we determined the role of STAT3/HIF-1α to further probe the mechanism of SOX2-mediated metastasis via Slug. Our results demonstrated that SOX2 over expressing Eca-109 cells showed an enhanced cell migration/invasion. Moreover, these cells exhibited the EMT characteristics, that is, a significantly suppressed expression of the epithelial cells marker with a concomitant enhancement of those of the mesenchymal markers. An increased expression of Slug in SOX2 over expressing cells suggested the involvement of this transcription factor in SOX2-regulated metastasis. Whereas the expressions of STAT3/HIF-1α were found to be up-regulated in SOX2 expressing cells, blockade of these transcription factors resulted in the inhibition of Slug expression at both protein and mRNA levels.
These results suggest that SOX2 promoted the metastasis of ESCC, at least in part, by modulating Slug expression through the activation of STAT3/HIF-1α signaling.
Sexual dimorphism is one of the most pervasive and diverse features of animal morphology, physiology, and behavior. Despite the generality of the phenomenon itself, the mechanisms controlling how sex is determined differ considerably among various organismic groups, have evolved repeatedly and independently, and the underlying molecular pathways can change quickly during evolution. Even within closely related groups of organisms for which the development of gonads on the morphological, histological, and cell biological level is undistinguishable, the molecular control and the regulation of the factors involved in sex determination and gonad differentiation can be substantially different. The biological meaning of the high molecular plasticity of an otherwise common developmental program is unknown. While comparative studies suggest that the downstream effectors of sex-determining pathways tend to be more stable than the triggering mechanisms at the top, it is still unclear how conserved the downstream networks are and how all components work together. After many years of stasis, when the molecular basis of sex determination was amenable only in the few classical model organisms (fly, worm, mouse), recently, sex-determining genes from several animal species have been identified and new studies have elucidated some novel regulatory interactions and biological functions of the downstream network, particularly in vertebrates. These data have considerably changed our classical perception of a simple linear developmental cascade that makes the decision for the embryo to develop as male or female, and how it evolves.
We determined whether a child with 17α-hydroxylase/17, 20-lyase deficiency possessed the sex-determining region (SRY) gene, and examined the mutations present in the CYP17A1 gene that led to 17α-hydroxylase/17, 20-lyase deficiency. In the child, karyotype analysis was performed and polymerase chain reaction analysis and electrophoretic techniques were used to identify the SRY gene. A total of 50 normal individuals were included as a control group. Polymerase chain reaction and DNA sequencing were used to identify CYP17A1 gene mutations in all samples. The karyotype of the child was 46, XY, which was inconsistent with her social sex, SRY was positive, and a compound heterozygous mutation p. Thr101Ilefs*2 in exon 2 and p. Thr306Ale in exon 5 were identified in the CYP17A1 gene. These mutations were inherited from her parents. In the 20 normal individuals, these mutations were not identified. In the child, sex reversal may have been caused by CYP17A1 mutations. The compound heterozygous mutation of p. Thr101Ilefs*2 and p. Thr306Ale is a new gene mutation of 17α-hydroxylase/17, 20-lyase deficiency.
Generation of distinct cortical projection neuron subtypes during development relies in part on repression of alternative neuron identities. It was reported that the special AT-rich sequence-binding protein 2 (Satb2) is required for proper development of callosal neuron identity and represses expression of genes that are essential for subcerebral axon development. Surprisingly, Satb2 has recently been shown to be necessary for subcerebral axon development. Here, we unravel a previously unidentified mechanism underlying this paradox. We show that SATB2 directly activates transcription of forebrain embryonic zinc finger 2 (Fezf2) and SRY-box 5 (Sox5), genes essential for subcerebral neuron development. We find that the mutual regulation between Satb2 and Fezf2 enables Satb2 to promote subcerebral neuron identity in layer 5 neurons, and to repress subcerebral characters in callosal neurons. Thus, Satb2 promotes the development of callosal and subcerebral neurons in a cell context-dependent manner.
Deregulated c-Myc expression is a hallmark of many human cancers. We have recently identified a role of mammalian homolog of yeast SPT-ADA-GCN5-acetyltransferas (SAGA) complex component, SAGA-associated factor 29 (SGF29), in regulating the c-Myc overexpression. Here, we discuss the molecular nature of SFG29 in SPT3-TAF9-GCN5-acetyltransferase complex, a counterpart of yeast SAGA complex, and the mechanism through which the elevated SGF29 expression contribute to oncogenic potential of c-Myc in hepatocellularcarcinoma (HCC). We propose that the upstream regulation of SGF29 elicited by sex-determining region Y (Sry) is also augmented in HCC. We hypothesize that c-Myc elevation driven by the deregulated Sry and SGF29 pathway is implicated in the male specific acquisition of human HCCs.
In chronic kidney disease (CKD), progressive nephron loss causes glomerular sclerosis, as well as tubulointerstitial fibrosis and progressive tubular injury. In this study, we aimed to identify molecular changes that reflected the histopathological progression of renal tubulointerstitial fibrosis and tubular cell damage. A discovery set of renal biopsies were obtained from 48 patients with histopathologically confirmed CKD, and gene expression profiles were determined by microarray analysis. The results indicated that hepatitis A virus cellular receptor 1 (also known as Kidney Injury Molecule-1, KIM-1), lipocalin 2 (also known as neutrophil gelatinase-associated lipocalin, NGAL), SRY-box 9, WAP four-disulfide core domain 2, and NK6 homeobox 2 were differentially expressed in CKD. Their expression levels correlated with the extent of tubulointerstitial fibrosis and tubular cell injury, determined by histopathological examination. The expression of these 5 genes was also increased as kidney damage progressed in a rodent unilateral ureteral obstruction model of CKD. We calculated a molecular score using the microarray gene expression profiles of the biopsy specimens. The composite area under the receiver operating characteristics curve plotted using this molecular score showed a high accuracy for diagnosing tubulointerstitial fibrosis and tubular cell damage. The robust sensitivity of this score was confirmed in a validation set of 5 individuals with CKD. These findings identified novel molecular markers with the potential to contribute to the detection of tubular cell damage and tubulointerstitial fibrosis in the kidney.
46,XY pure gonadal dysgenesis (Swyer syndrome) is characterized by normal female genitalia at birth. It usually first becomes apparent in adolescence with delayed puberty and amenorrhea. Rarely, patients can present with spontaneous breast development and/or menstruation. A fifteen-year-old girl presented to our clinic with the complaint of primary amenorrhea. On physical examination, her external genitals were completely female. Breast development and pubic hair were compatible with Tanner stage V. Hormonal evaluation revealed a hypergonadotropic state despite a normal estrogen level. Chromosome analysis revealed a 46,XY karyotype. Pelvic ultrasonography showed small gonads and a normal sized uterus for age. SRY gene expression was confirmed by multiplex polymerase chain reaction. Direct sequencing on genomic DNA did not reveal a mutation in the SRY, SF1 and WT1 genes. After the diagnosis of Swyer syndrome was made, the patient started to have spontaneous menstrual cycles and therefore failed to attend her follow-up visits. After nine months, the patient underwent diagnostic laparoscopy. Frozen examination of multiple biopsies from gonad tissues revealed gonadoblastoma. With this report, we emphasize the importance of performing karyotype analysis, which is diagnostic for Swyer syndrome, in all cases with primary or secondary amenorrhea even in the presence of normal breast development. We also suggest that normal pubertal development in patients with Swyer syndrome may be associated with the presence of a hormonally active tumor.
Fibroblast growth factor (FGF)-2 has the potential to enhance tendon-to-bone healing after rotator cuff (RC) injury.
FGF-2 stimulates tenogenic differentiation of progenitors to improve the biomechanical strength and histological appearance of repaired RCs in rats.
Controlled laboratory study.
Adult male Sprague-Dawley rats (N = 156) underwent unilateral surgery to repair the supraspinatus tendon to insertion sites. The FGF-2-treated group (gelatin hydrogel containing 5 μg of FGF-2) and a control group (gelatin hydrogel only) were compared to investigate the effects of FGF-2 at 2, 4, 6, 8, and 12 weeks postoperatively. Biomechanical testing was performed at 6 and 12 weeks. Semiquantitative histological analysis and immunohistochemical analysis for the proliferating cell nuclear antigen (PCNA) were performed, and the expression of tendon-related markers, including Scleraxis (Scx) and Tenomodulin (Tnmd), was monitored by real-time reverse transcription polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR) and in situ hybridization. SRY-box containing gene 9 (Sox9) expression was monitored by RT-PCR and immunohistochemical analysis. At 2 and 4 weeks, immunohistochemical analysis for mesenchymal stem cell (MSC) markers was also performed.
The FGF-2-treated group demonstrated a significant improvement in mechanical strength at 6 and 12 weeks and significantly higher histological scores than the control group at ≥4 weeks. The average incidence of PCNA-positive cells was significantly higher at 2 and 4 weeks, and more cells expressing MSC markers were detected at the insertion site in the FGF-2-treated group. The expression level of Scx increased significantly in the FGF-2-treated group from 4 to 8 weeks, while the Tnmd level increased significantly from 4 to 12 weeks postoperatively. The localization of Tnmd overlapped with the locations of reparative tissues accompanying collagen fibers with an aligned orientation. Sox9 expression was significantly upregulated at 4 weeks in the FGF-2-treated group.
FGF-2 promotes growth of the tenogenic progenitor cells, which participate in tendon-to-bone healing, resulting in biomechanical and histological improvement of the repaired RC.
These findings provide clues regarding the clinical development of regenerative repair strategies for RC injury.
A female thoroughbred successful in horse racing was positively tested for high testosterone values. This horse neither showed stallion-like-behaviour nor signs of ambiguous external genitalia. The karyotype of this horse was 2n = 64,XY and the sex-determining region of Y (SRY) PCR was positive. Hair samples tested for naturally testosterone revealed values normal for stallions, and tests for eight synthetic testosterone esters remained negative. The phenotype, ultrasonographic examination, hormone status, cytogenetic evaluation and molecular diagnostics lead to the diagnosis of an XY testicular disorder of sexual development (DSD) due to a complete androgen insensitivity syndrome. To our knowledge this is the first report about a thoroughbred in racing sports with an XY testicular disorder of sexual development. To date, intersex racing horses have never been described in thoroughbreds or a regulation for intersexes in regard to horse races has been issued.
Phenoloxidases (POs) play key roles in various physiological functions in insects, e.g., cuticular sclerotization, wound healing, egg tanning, cuticle formation and melanotic encapsulaction of pathogens. Previously, we identified five POs, designated As-pro-PO I-V, from the mosquito Armigeres subalbatus and demonstrated that the functions of As-pro-PO I, II and III, were associated with filarial parasite melanization, blood feeding and cuticle formation, respectively. In the present study, we delineate the dual functions of As-pro-PO V. We found that the level of As-pro-PO V mRNA in mosquitoes was significantly increased after microfilaria challenge or blood feeding, and decreased to normal level after oviposition. Knockdown of As-pro-PO V by dsRNA resulted in significant decreases in the degree of microfilaria melanization, egg chronic melanization rates and egg hatching rates in Ar. subalbatus. Further transfection and electrophoretic mobility-shift assays verified the As-pro-PO V gene might regulated by both AP-1, a putative immune-related regulatory element and CdxA, a developmental regulatory element. The binding of AP-1 and CdxA motif with mosquito nuclear extracts was significantly enhanced after microfilaria challenge and blood-feeding in Ar. subalbatus, respectively. These results indicate that As-pro-PO V is a critical enzyme that is required for both an effective melanization immune response and egg chorion melanization in this mosquito.
Our recent genome-wide association study (GWAS) had discovered a new locus at 8p23 (rs2738048) associated with IgA nephropathy (IgAN) in Chinese Han patients, implicating the DEFA gene family within this locus as susceptibility genes. However, it is still unknown whether there are additional variations within these genes associated with the disease susceptibility. The aim of this study is to investigate the polymorphisms of DEFA genes in the susceptibility to IgAN and explore possible disease mechanisms. Sixteen tag single-nucleotide polymorphisms (tag SNPs) were selected for association study in 1,000 IgAN cases and 1,000 controls by using Sequenom MassArray system or TaqMan SNP genotyping assays. We found seven SNPs within DEFA genes that were significantly associated with IgAN, including rs2738048 discovered in our previous GWAS (p = 0.0007, OR = 0.77) and additional 6 SNPs (rs2615787, p = 0.0001, OR = 0.74; rs2738081, p = 0.0003, OR = 0.72; rs2738058, p = 0.0001, OR = 0.73; rs4288398, p = 0.0008, OR = 0.78; rs6984215, p = 0.002, OR = 0.63; rs12716641, p = 0.00002, OR = 0.71). Electrophoretic mobility shift assays and luciferase assays demonstrated that fragments containing rs2738048, rs2738081 and rs6984215 were transcription factor binding sites for CTF, SP1 and CdxA, respectively, and the allele status of rs2738048 and rs6984215 could significantly change the luciferase activity. These results suggest that polymorphisms within DEFA genes are involved in gene transcriptional regulation, and this may have some effect in mediating susceptibility to IgAN in southern Chinese.
This study examined the associations between vitamin D status, bone mineral content (BMC), areal bone mineral density (aBMD), and markers of calcium homeostasis in preschool-aged children. Children (n=488; age range: 1.8-6.0 y) were randomly recruited from Montreal. The distal forearm was scanned using a peripheral dual-energy X-ray absorptiometry scanner (Lunar PIXI; GE Healthcare, Fairfield, CT). A subset (n=81) had clinical dual-energy X-ray absorptiometry (cDXA) scans (Hologic 4500A Discovery Series) of lumbar spine (LS) 1-4, whole body, and ultradistal forearm. All were assessed for plasma 25-hydroxyvitamin D [25(OH)D] and parathyroid hormone concentrations (Liaison; Diasorin), ionized calcium (ABL80 FLEX; Radiometer Medical A/S), and dietary vitamin D and calcium intakes by survey. Age (p<0.001) and weight-for-age Z-score (p<0.001) were positively associated with BMC and aBMD in all regression models, whereas male sex contributed positively to forearm BMC and aBMD. Having a 25(OH)D concentration of >75 nmol/L positively associated with forearm and whole body BMC and aBMD (p<0.036). Sun index related to (p<0.029) cDXA forearm and LS 1-4 BMC and whole-body aBMD. Nutrient intakes did not relate to BMC or aBMD. In conclusion, higher vitamin D status is linked to higher BMC and aBMD of forearm and whole body in preschool-aged children.
Helicobacter pylori encoded CagA is presently the only known virulence factor that is injected into gastric epithelial cells where it destroys apical junctional complexes and induces dedifferentiation of gastric epithelial cells, leading to H. pylori-related gastric carcinogensis. However, little is known about the molecular mechanisms by which CagA mediates these changes. Caudal-related homeobox 2 (Cdx2) is an intestine-specific transcription factor highly expressed in multistage tissues of dysplasia and cancer. One specific target of Cdx2, Claudin-2, is involved in the regulation of tight junction (TJ) permeability. In this study, our findings showed that the activity of Cdx2 binding to Cdx binding sites of CdxA (GTTTATG) and CdxB (TTTTAGG) of probes corresponding to claudin-2 flanking region increased in AGS cells, infected with CagA positive wild-type strain of H. pylori, compared to CagA negative isogenic mutant-type strain. Moreover, Cdx2 upregulated claudin-2 expression at transcriptional level and translational level. In the meantime, we found that TJs of AGS cells, infected with CagA positive wild-type strain of H. pylori, compared to CagA negative isogenic mutant-type strain, were more severely destroyed, leading to wider cell gap, interference of contact, scattering and highly elevated migration of cells. Herein, this study is firstly demonstrated that H. pylori-encoded CagA disrupts TJs and induces invasiveness of AGS gastric carcinoma cells via Cdx2-dependent targeting of Claudin-2. This provides a new mechanism whereby CagA induced dedifferentiation of AGS cells, leading to malignant behavior of biology.
There are few large-scale studies on the utility of peripheral dual energy X-ray absorptiometry (pDXA) in children. As central dual energy X-ray absorptiometry (cDXA) equipment is not commonly available in the developing world, we assessed the correlation of bone mineral density (BMD) with cDXA and pDXA in children to determine the optimal Z-score thresholds of pDXA for predicting two predefined Z-score cutoffs (≤-1, ≤-2) of cDXA in 844 subjects (441 boys, 403 girls) aged 10-18 years. The BMD of antero-posterior lumbar spine (L1-L4), proximal femur and forearm was measured by cDXA, while the peripheral BMD of forearm and calcaneus was estimated using pDXA. The correlation was statistically significant at all sites (p<0.01). The coefficients ranged from 0.56 to 0.79 in boys and 0.17 to 0.32 in girls. A significant positive correlation was observed between BMD by pDXA and cDXA in Indian children, with a strong gender difference in both the extent of correlation and the ability of peripheral BMD to predict central BMD.
The high mobility group box 1 (HMGB1) protein is a multifunctional cytokine-like molecule that plays an important role in the pathogenesis of tumors. In this study, real-time polymerase chain reactions and Western blot assays indicated that HMGB1 transcriptional activity and protein level are increased in Tax+-T cells (TaxP). To clarify the mechanisms, a series of HMGB1 deletion reporter plasmids (pHLuc1 to pHLuc6) were transfected into Tax--T cells (TaxN, Jurkat) and Tax+-T cells (TaxP). We found that promoter activity in Tax+-T cells to be higher than that in Tax--T cells, indicating a significant increase in pHLuc6. Bay11-7082 (NF-κB inhibitor) treatment did not block the enhancing effect. Chromatin immunoprecipitation assays revealed that Tax was retained on a HMGB1 promoter fragment encompassing -1163 to -975. Bioinformatics analysis showed six characteristic cis-elements for CdxA, AP-1, AML-1a, USF, v-Myb, and C/EBP in the fragment in question. Mutation of cis- elements for C/EBP reduced significant HMGB1 promoter activity induced by Tax. These findings indicate that Tax enhances the expression of HMGB1 gene at the transcriptional level, possibly by interacting with C/EBP.
Interferon regulatory factor 2 (IRF-2) is a multi-functional transcription factor in the IRF family exhibiting both transcriptional activating and repressing activities. In this study, an IRF-2 gene (HcIRF-2) from Hyriopsis cumingii was identified and characterized. The cDNA sequence consisted of 2688 bp, encoding a 329 amino acid-protein. The amino acid sequence had a highly conserved N-terminal DBD structure, containing characteristic repeats of six tryptophan residues. The 5'-flanking region contained several transcription regulation elements such as AP1, CdxA, HSF, NIT2 and HNF-3b. Nine SNPs were obtained through direct sequencing of HcIRF-2 from resistant and susceptible stock. Only +2365T/C SNP was significantly associated with resistance/susceptibility of H. cumingii to Aeromonas hydrophila both in genotype (P = 0.021) and allele (P = 0.006) analysis. The SNPs +2248T/C and +2365T/C were in high linkage disequilibrium, and haplotype analysis revealed that haplotype TT frequency in the resistant group was significantly higher than in the susceptible group. The mortality in +2248CC genotype individuals was significantly higher than in CT and TT genotype individuals. These results indicated that haplotype TT and genotype +2248CT and +2248GT individuals were resistant to A. hydrophila, which could make them potential markers in selective breeding of H. cumingii.
Based on the cDNA sequence of GPX in Hyriopsis cumingii, the complete genomic DNA of GPX gene and it's 5'-flanking region were identified from H. cumingii using PCR and genome walking technique. The length of the complete genomic sequence was 6 708 bp including the 5'-flanking region, two exons, and one intron. Sequence analysis of the 992 bp 5'-flanking region revealed that it contained a core promoter element (TATA-box) and other transcription regulation elements such as AP1, C/EBP, and CdxA. The sequence lengths of the two exons were 273 bp and 991 bp, respectively, and the intron was 4 491 bp in length. Sixteen single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) were detected in the GPX gene from resistant stock (RS) and susceptible stock (SS) of H. cumingii. These polymorphisms were analyzed with regard to resistance to Aeromonas hydrophila. Among them, three SNPs including A-99G, A-86C, and A-49C in GPX promoter and five SNPs including A2841T, C2847T, G3146C, A3150G, and G4645T in GPX introns were associated with resistance/susceptibility of H. cumingii to A. hydrophila, both in genotype and allele frequency. Linkage disequilibrium analysis revealed that A-86C, A-49C, C2847T, A3150G, G4645T, A2841T, and G3146C were in high linkage disequilibrium, and haplotype analysis revealed that the frequency of two major predominant haplotypes (ACTGT and TG) in the resistant group was significantly higher than that in the susceptible group. The results suggest that the polymorphic loci in the GPX gene could be potential genetic markers for future molecular selection of strains resistant to diseases.
Investigating intestinal physiology in vitro remains challenging due to the lack of an effective primary enterocyte culture system. Recently developed protocols for growing organoids containing crypts and villus from adult mouse intestinal epithelium in Matrigel present an attractive alternative to the classical techniques. However, these approaches require the use of sophisticated and expensive serum-free medium supplemented with epithelial growth factor (EGF), Wnt agonist (R-spondin 1), and bone morphogenetic protein inhibitor (Noggin) in high concentrations. Here we demonstrate that is possible to use an isolated chicken embryonic intestinal epithelium to create such an organoid culture. Structures formed in Matrigel matrix in the first two days following isolation survive and enlarge during ensuing weeks. They have the appearance of empty spheres and comprise cells expressing cytokeratin (an epithelial cell marker), villin (a marker of enterocytes), and Sox-9 (a transcription factor characteristic of progenitors and stem cells of intestinal crypts). With chicken embryonic tissue as a source of organoids, prostaglandin E2 is as effective as R-spondin 1 and Noggin in promoting sustained growth and survival of epithelial spheroids.
The production of therapeutic proteins from transgenic animals is one of the most important successes of animal biotechnology. Milk is presently the most mature system for production of therapeutic proteins from a transgenic animal. Specifically, β-casein is a major component of cow, goat and sheep milk, and its promoter has been used to regulate the expression of transgenic genes in the mammary gland of transgenic animals. Here, we cloned the porcine β-casein gene and analyzed the transcriptional activity of the promoter and intron 1 region of the porcine β-casein gene. Sequence inspection of the 5'-flanking region revealed potential DNA elements including SRY, CdxA, AML-a, GATA-3, GATA-1 and C/EBP β. In addition, the first intron of the porcine β-casein gene contained the transcriptional enhancers Oct-1, SRY, YY1, C/EBP β, and AP-1, as well as the retroviral TATA box. We estimated the transcriptional activity for the 5'-proximal region with or without intron 1 of the porcine β-casein gene in HC11 cells stimulated with lactogenic hormones. High transcriptional activity was obtained for the 5'-proximal region with intron 1 of the porcine β-casein gene. The β-casein gene containing the mutant TATA box (CATAAAA) was also cloned from another individual pig. Promoter activity of the luciferase vector containing the mutant TATA box was weaker than the same vector containing the normal TATA box. Taken together, these findings suggest that the transcription of porcine β-casein gene is regulated by lactogenic hormone via intron 1 and promoter containing a mutant TATA box (CATAAAA) has poor porcine β-casein gene activity.
To examine whether PARK16, which was recently identified as a protective locus for Parkinson disease (PD) in Asian, white, and South American populations, is also associated with PD in the genetically homogeneous Ashkenazi Jewish population.
Case-control study.
A medical center affiliated with a university. Subjects  Five single-nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) located between RAB7L1 and SLC41A1 were analyzed in 720 patients with PD and 642 controls, all of Ashkenazi Jewish origin.
Haplotypes were defined and risk estimates were determined for each SNP and haplotype. Bioinformatic analysis defined the putative promoter region of RAB7L1 and the transcription factor binding sites that are potentially affected by 2 of the tested SNPs.
All tested SNPs were significantly associated with PD (odds ratios = 0.64-0.76; P = .0002-.014). Two of them, rs1572931 and rs823144, were localized to the putative promoter region of RAB7L1 and their sequence variations altered the predicted transcription factor binding sites of CdxA, p300, GATA-1, Sp1, and c-Ets-1. Only 0.4% of patients were homozygous for the protective rs1572931 genotype (T/T), compared with 3.0% among controls (P = 5 × 10(-5)). This SNP was included in a haplotype that reduced the risk for PD by 10- to 12-fold (P = .002-.01) in all patients with PD and in a subgroup of patients who do not carry the Ashkenazi founder mutations in the GBA or LRRK2 genes.
Our data demonstrate that specific SNP variations and haplotypes in the PARK16 locus are associated with reduced risk for PD in Ashkenazim. Although it is possible that alterations in the putative promoter of RAB7L1 are associated with this effect, the role of other genes in this locus cannot be ruled out.
Cyclin-dependent kinase 6 (CDK6) is a key element of D-type cyclin holoenzymes. It is involved in the regulation of the G1-phase of the cell cycle and is considered to be an important candidate gene for selection of body measurement traits through marker-assisted selection. We cloned the promoter sequence of this gene in bovines and found it to share high similarity with that of the human CDK6 promoter. A 2271-bp sequence upstream of the start codon in the bovine CDK6 5'-flanking sequence is rich in GC; it lacks consensus TATA or CAAT box, but it contains several MZF1 binding sites. Other potential cis-regulatory elements were found in the 5'-flanking region, including CdxA, SRY, p300, GATA-1, and deltaE. Allele frequencies were also analyzed in various cattle breeds (Qinchuan, Qinchuan improvement steers, Nanyang, Jiaxian red, Xia'nan, Luxi, Simmental and Luxi crossbred steers, and Xuelong) and association with a selected single nucleotide polymorphism (SNP) was calculated. The T-1075C SNP in the promoter was found to be significantly associated with body length and heart girth. This SNP marker was found to be significantly associated with body length and the heart girth in 737 individuals. We conclude that this SNP of the CDK6 gene has potential as a genetic marker for important body traits in bovine reproduction and breeding.
Dual-energy X-ray absorptiometry (DXA) is the standard method to assess bone mineral density (BMD). The International Society for Clinical Densitometry recommends the measurement of BMD at lumbar spine, total hip and femoral neck, but in certain circumstances the 33% radius may be the recommended area to measure BMD. The aim of this study has been to analyze whether 33% radius should be considered the recommended area to assess BMD in prostate cancer patients.
This is a retrospective study where BMD was assessed by DXA at 33% radius, lumbar spine, total hip, and femoral neck (cDXA) in 141 prostate cancer patients. Twenty-eight patients were hormone naïve while 113 were subjected to androgen suppression (AS) during the mean period of 29 months. Osteoporosis was diagnosed when T-score was lower than -2.5 and osteopenia when it ranged between -1 and -2.5.
The osteoporosis rate was 29.8% at 33% radius, 23.4% at femoral neck, 19.9% at lumbar spine, and 12.8% at total hip. The overall osteoporosis rate at cDXA was 29.1%. Osteoporosis was detected in 52.2% at 33% radius and 36.2% at cDXA. Normal BMD was found in 17.7% at 33% radius and 34.8% at cDXA. The 33% radius was the only site where a significant increase in the osteoporosis rate was detected in patients subjected to AS compared to those hormone naïve (33 and 13.8%).
The 33% radius seems more sensible than the central skeleton areas to detect bone mass loss in patients with prostate cancer.
Alkaline phosphatases are ubiquitous enzymes involved in many important biological processes. Mammalian tissue-nonspecific alkaline phosphatase has long been thought to feature in embryonic development and bone formation. In this study, an alkaline phosphatase (ALP) gene from Paralichthys olivaceus was identified by rapid amplification of cDNA ends and genome-walking PCR. The ALP gene extends 10,141 bp and contains 11 exons and 10 introns. The open reading frame of the ALP transcript consists of 1,431 bp, which encodes 476 amino acids products named as POALP. An analysis of its secondary and tertiary structure revealed that the POALP was conserved in different species, but one disulfide linkage made it possible to adapt to low-temperature environment. The ALP activity was found to be first detectable in the embryo before hatching. The POALP was distributed ubiquitously in the body of P. olivaceus and was particularly high in the digestive tract. These findings suggest the potential role of POALP in nutrient absorption and transportation. During the pre-metamorphosis (F stage), ALP gene expression is 2.5-folds of that in the pro-metamorphosis (E stage); but in the post-metamorphosis (I stage), it was 1.8-folds of that of pro-metamorphosis. Exogenetic thyroxine (T4) and thiourea (TU) influenced the ALP gene expression significantly during the metamorphosis. Bioinformatics analysis showed that Japanese flounder ALP promoter region contained promoter sequence and putative recognition site for several transcriptional factors, including SREBP-1, SYR, and CdxA. In vitro promoter assays employing EGFP reporter system demonstrated that the promoter of ALP was active.
Prevotella bryantii B(1)4 is a member of the phylum Bacteroidetes and contributes to the degradation of hemicellulose in the rumen. The genome of P. bryantii harbors four genes predicted to encode glycoside hydrolase (GH) family 3 (GH3) enzymes. To evaluate whether these genes encode enzymes with redundant biological functions, each gene was cloned and expressed in Escherichia coli. Biochemical analysis of the recombinant proteins revealed that the enzymes exhibit different substrate specificities. One gene encoded a cellodextrinase (CdxA), and three genes encoded beta-xylosidase enzymes (Xyl3A, Xyl3B, and Xyl3C) with different specificities for either para-nitrophenyl (pNP)-linked substrates or substituted xylooligosaccharides. To identify the amino acid residues that contribute to catalysis and substrate specificity within this family of enzymes, the roles of conserved residues (R177, K214, H215, M251, and D286) in Xyl3B were probed by site-directed mutagenesis. Each mutation led to a severely decreased catalytic efficiency without a change in the overall structure of the mutant enzymes. Through amino acid sequence alignments, an amino acid residue (E115) that, when mutated to aspartic acid, resulted in a 14-fold decrease in the k(cat)/K(m) for pNP-beta-d-xylopyranoside (pNPX) with a concurrent 1.1-fold increase in the k(cat)/K(m) for pNP-beta-d-glucopyranoside (pNPG) was identified. Amino acid residue E115 may therefore contribute to the discrimination between beta-xylosides and beta-glucosides. Our results demonstrate that each of the four GH3 enzymes has evolved to perform a specific role in lignopolysaccharide hydrolysis and provide insight into the role of active-site residues in catalysis and substrate specificity for GH3 enzymes.
More than ten bradykinin-related peptides and their cDNAs have been identified from amphibians, but their genes are unknown. In present study, four cDNAs encoding one, two, four and six copies of bradykinin-related peptides were cloned from the frog (Odorrana grahami) skin cDNA library, respectively. Three bradykinin-related peptides (bradykinin, Thr6-bradykinin, Leu5Thr6-bradykinin) were deduced from these four cDNA sequences. Based on the cDNA sequence, the gene sequence encoding an amphibian bradykinin-related peptide from O. grahami was determined. It is composed of 7481 base pairs including two exons and two introns. The first exon codes signal peptide and the second exon codes acidic spacer peptide and Thr6-bradykinin. The promoter region of the bradykinin gene contains several putative recognition sites for nuclear factors, such as SRY, GATA-1, LYF-1, DeltaE, CDXA, NKX-2.5, MIF1 and S8. The current work may facilitate to understand the regulation and possible functions of amphibian skin bradykinin-related peptides.
Interferon regulatory factor 3 (IRF-3), an essential transcriptional regulator of the interferon genes, has been implicated in virus and double-stranded RNA mediated induction of IFN-α, IFN-β and RANTES, in virus-induced apoptosis and in tumor suppression. Promoter plays an important role in the regulation of gene expression, but the characterization of the human IRF-3 promoter has not been systematically analyzed in HEK 293 cells. To characterize the human IRF-3 promoter, we have isolated a genomic clone of the human IRF-3 gene promoter region containing 1,000 nucleotides of the 5'- flanking region. Transient transfection of 5'-deleted promoter-reporter constructs and luciferase assay illustrated the region -149/-93 relative to the transcription start site (TSS) is sufficient for full promoter activity. This region contains HSF, E2F, CdxA and c-Myb transcription factor binding sites. The E2F sites are highly conserved among IRF-3 promoter regions of mouse, rat and human. Therefore, it was suggested that this E2F site may be essential for basal promoter activity. Surprisingly, mutation of this E2F site increased the promoter activity by 2-fold. Furthermore, overexpression of E2F1 reduced the transcription activity by 80%. These results indicated that human IRF-3 gene core promoter was located within the region -149/-93 relative to the TSS. E2F1 transcription factor negatively regulates human IRF-3 gene promoter.
Endoderm organ primordia become specified between gastrulation and gut tube folding in Amniotes. Although the requirement for RA signaling for the development of a few individual endoderm organs has been established a systematic assessment of its activity along the entire antero-posterior axis has not been performed in this germ layer.
RA is synthesized from gastrulation to somitogenesis in the mesoderm that is close to the developing gut tube. In the branchial arch region specific levels of RA signaling control organ boundaries. The most anterior endoderm forming the thyroid gland is specified in the absence of RA signaling. Increasing RA in anterior branchial arches results in thyroid primordium repression and the induction of more posterior markers such as branchial arch Hox genes. Conversely reducing RA signaling shifts Hox genes posteriorly in endoderm. These results imply that RA acts as a caudalizing factor in a graded manner in pharyngeal endoderm. Posterior foregut and midgut organ primordia also require RA, but exposing endoderm to additional RA is not sufficient to expand these primordia anteriorly. We show that in chick, in contrast to non-Amniotes, RA signaling is not only necessary during gastrulation, but also throughout gut tube folding during somitogenesis. Our results show that the induction of CdxA, a midgut marker, and pancreas induction require direct RA signaling in endoderm. Moreover, communication between CdxA(+) cells is necessary to maintain CdxA expression, therefore synchronizing the cells of the midgut primordium. We further show that the RA pathway acts synergistically with FGF4 in endoderm patterning rather than mediating FGF4 activity.
Our work establishes that retinoic acid (RA) signaling coordinates the position of different endoderm organs along the antero-posterior axis in chick embryos and could serve as a basis for the differentiation of specific endodermal organs from ES cells.
Gene regulation during development is an important biological activity that leads to synthesis of biomolecules at specific locations and specific times. The single tropomyosin gene of Caenorhabditis elegans, tmy-1/lev-11, produces four isoforms of protein: two from the external promoter and two from the internal promoter. We investigated the internal promoter of tropomyosin to identify sequences that regulate expression of tmy-1 in the pharynx and intestine. By promoter deletion of tmy-1 reporters as well as by database analyses, a 100-bp fragment that contained binding sequences for a GATA factor, for a chicken CdxA homolog, and for a forkhead factor was identified. Both the forkhead and CdxA binding sequences contributed to pharyngeal and intestinal expression. In addition, the GATA site also influenced intestinal expression of tmy-1 reporter. We showed that ELT-2 and PHA-4 proteins interact directly with the GATA and forkhead binding sequences, respectively, in gel mobility shift assays. RNA interference knockdown of elt-2 diminished tmy-1::gfp expression in the intestine. In contrast to RNA interference knockdown of pha-4, expression of tmy-1::gfp in pha-4;smg-1 mutants was slightly weaker than that of the wild type. Ectopic expression of PHA-4 and ELT-2 by heat shock was sufficient to elicit widespread expression of tmy-1::lacZ reporter in embryos. We found no indication of a synergistic relation between ELT-2 and PHA-4. Based on our data, PHA-4 and CdxA function as general transcription factors for pharyngeal and intestinal regulation of tmy-1. We present models by which ELT-2, PHA-4, and CdxA orchestrate expression from the internal promoter of tmy-1.
Senescence marker protein-30 (SMP30), whose expression declines during aging in rat liver, has been proposed as an important aging marker. Besides apoptosis, SMP30 also protects cells against various other injuries by enhancement of membrane calcium-pump activity. The mechanism of this differential gene expression mechanism is not known. DNA-protein interactions, mutation analysis and luciferase reporter assay studies have been performed to elucidate the mechanism of transcriptional regulation of SMP30 gene.
We have characterized up to -2750 bp of the promoter by DNA-protein interactions studies. Twenty eight transcription factor binding sites have been identified by DNase I footprinting and electrophoretic mobility shift assay (EMSA). Transient transfection of 5' and 3' -deleted promoter-reporter constructs and luciferase assay illustrated the region between -128/+157 bp is sufficient to drive promoter activity. We have mapped an essential regulatory region between -513 to -352 bp which causes a drastic decline of reporter activity. This region contains CdxA, GATA2 and SRY transcription factor binding sites. Individual mutation of these three sites showed increase in reporter activity. Mutation in SRY site (-403/-368) showed maximum increase in reporter activity among these three sites. Therefore, we suggest that SRY like protein may be acting as a strong repressor of SMP30 gene along with CdxA and GATA-2. We also report that mutation of both Sp1 (172/-148 bp) and a C/EBPbeta (-190/-177 bp) transcription binding site located adjacent to each other on SMP30 gene promoter, causes a significant enhancement in reporter activity than individual mutation, thus may be causing the repression of SMP30 promoter activity.
These studies provide novel insights into the mechanism that regulate SMP30 gene expression.
The TATA binding protein (TBP) plays a pivotal role in RNA polymerase II (Pol II) transcription through incorporation into the TFIID and B-TFIID complexes. The role of mammalian B-TFIID composed of TBP and B-TAF1 is poorly understood. Using a complementation system in genetically modified mouse cells where endogenous TBP can be conditionally inactivated and replaced by exogenous mutant TBP coupled to tandem affinity purification and mass spectrometry, we identify two TBP mutations, R188E and K243E, that disrupt the TBP-BTAF1 interaction and B-TFIID complex formation. Transcriptome and ChIP-seq analyses show that loss of B-TFIID does not generally alter gene expression or genomic distribution of TBP, but positively or negatively affects TBP and/or Pol II recruitment to a subset of promoters. We identify promoters where wild-type TBP assembles a partial inactive preinitiation complex comprising B-TFIID, TFIIB and Mediator complex, but lacking TFIID, TFIIE and Pol II. Exchange of B-TFIID in wild-type cells for TFIID in R188E and K243E mutant cells at these primed promoters completes preinitiation complex formation and recruits Pol II to activate their expression. We propose a novel regulatory mechanism involving formation of a partial preinitiation complex comprising B-TFIID that primes the promoter for productive preinitiation complex formation in mammalian cells.
In eukaryotes, the core promoter serves as a platform for the assembly of transcription preinitiation complex (PIC) that includes TFIIA, TFIIB, TFIID, TFIIE, TFIIF, TFIIH, and RNA polymerase II (pol II), which function collectively to specify the transcription start site. PIC formation usually begins with TFIID binding to the TATA box, initiator, and/or downstream promoter element (DPE) found in most core promoters, followed by the entry of other general transcription factors (GTFs) and pol II through either a sequential assembly or a preassembled pol II holoenzyme pathway. Formation of this promoter-bound complex is sufficient for a basal level of transcription. However, for activator-dependent (or regulated) transcription, general cofactors are often required to transmit regulatory signals between gene-specific activators and the general transcription machinery. Three classes of general cofactors, including TBP-associated factors (TAFs), Mediator, and upstream stimulatory activity (USA)-derived positive cofactors (PC1/PARP-1, PC2, PC3/DNA topoisomerase I, and PC4) and negative cofactor 1 (NC1/HMGB1), normally function independently or in combination to fine-tune the promoter activity in a gene-specific or cell-type-specific manner. In addition, other cofactors, such as TAF1, BTAF1, and negative cofactor 2 (NC2), can also modulate TBP or TFIID binding to the core promoter. In general, these cofactors are capable of repressing basal transcription when activators are absent and stimulating transcription in the presence of activators. Here we review the roles of these cofactors and GTFs, as well as TBP-related factors (TRFs), TAF-containing complexes (TFTC, SAGA, SLIK/SALSA, STAGA, and PRC1) and TAF variants, in pol II-mediated transcription, with emphasis on the events occurring after the chromatin has been remodeled but prior to the formation of the first phosphodiester bond.
Bromodomains are epigenetic readers that are recruited to acetyllysine residues in histone tails. Recent studies have identified non-acetyl acyllysine modifications, raising the possibility that these might be read by bromodomains. Profiling the nearly complete human bromodomain family revealed that while most human bromodomains bind only the shorter acetyl and propionyl marks, the bromodomains of BRD9, CECR2, and the second bromodomain of TAF1 also recognize the longer butyryl mark. In addition, the TAF1 second bromodomain is capable of binding crotonyl marks. None of the human bromodomains tested binds succinyl marks. We characterized structurally and biochemically the binding to different acyl groups, identifying bromodomain residues and structural attributes that contribute to specificity. These studies demonstrate a surprising degree of plasticity in some human bromodomains but no single factor controlling specificity across the family. The identification of candidate butyryl- and crotonyllysine readers supports the idea that these marks could have specific physiological functions.
Repair of DNA double-strand breaks (DSBs) by recombination pathways is essential for plant growth and fertility. The recombination endonuclease MRE11 plays important roles in sensing and repair of DNA DSBs. Here we demonstrate protein interaction between Arabidopsis MRE11 and the histone acetyltransferase TAF1, a TATA-binding protein Associated Factor (TAF) of the RNA polymerase II transcription initiation factor complex TFIID. Arabidopsis has two TAF1 homologues termed TAF1 and TAF1b and mutant taf1b lines are viable and fertile. In contrast, taf1 null mutations are lethal, demonstrating that TAF1 is an essential gene. Heterozygous taf1(+/-) plants display abnormal segregation of the mutant allele resulting from defects in pollen tube development, indicating that TAF1 is important for gamete viability. Characterization of an allelic series of taf1 lines revealed that hypomorphic mutants are viable but display developmental defects and reduced plant fertility. Hypersensitivity of taf1 mutants lacking the C-terminal bromodomain to X-rays and mitomycin C, but not to other forms of abiotic stress, established a specific role for TAF1 in plant DNA repair processes. Collectively these studies reveal a function for TAF1 in plant resistance to genotoxic stress, providing further insight into the molecular mechanisms of the DNA damage response in plants.
Gene expression correlates with local chromatin structure. Our studies have mapped histone post-translational modifications, RNA polymerase II (pol II), and transcription factor Pax6 in lens chromatin. These data represent the first genome-wide insights into the relationship between lens chromatin structure and lens transcriptomes and serve as an excellent source for additional data analysis and refinement. The principal lens proteins, the crystallins, are encoded by predominantly expressed mRNAs; however, the regulatory mechanisms underlying their high expression in the lens remain poorly understood.
The formaldehyde-assisted identification of regulatory regions (FAIRE-Seq) was employed to analyze newborn lens chromatin. ChIP-seq and RNA-seq data published earlier (GSE66961) have been used to assist in FAIRE-seq data interpretation. RNA transcriptomes from murine lens epithelium, lens fibers, erythrocytes, forebrain, liver, neurons, and pancreas were compared to establish the gene expression levels of the most abundant mRNAs versus median gene expression across other differentiated cells.
Normalized RNA expression data from multiple tissues show that crystallins rank among the most highly expressed genes in mammalian cells. These findings correlate with the extremely high abundance of pol II all across the crystallin loci, including crystallin genes clustered on chromosomes 1 and 5, as well as within regions of "open" chromatin, as identified by FAIRE-seq. The expression levels of mRNAs encoding DNA-binding transcription factors (e.g., Foxe3, Hsf4, Maf, Pax6, Prox1, Sox1, and Tfap2a) revealed that their transcripts form "clusters" of abundant mRNAs in either lens fibers or lens epithelium. The expression of three autophagy regulatory mRNAs, encoding Tfeb, FoxO1, and Hif1α, was found within a group of lens preferentially expressed transcription factors compared to the E12.5 forebrain.
This study reveals novel features of lens chromatin, including the remarkably high abundance of pol II at the crystallin loci that exhibit features of "open" chromatin. Hsf4 ranks among the most abundant fiber cell-preferred DNA-binding transcription factors. Notable transcripts, including Atf4, Ctcf, E2F4, Hey1, Hmgb1, Mycn, RXRβ, Smad4, Sp1, and Taf1 (transcription factors) and Ctsd, Gabarapl1, and Park7 (autophagy regulators) have been identified with high levels of expression in lens fibers, which suggests specific roles in lens fiber cell terminal differentiation.
The AT-hook has been defined as a DNA binding peptide motif that contains a glycine-arginine-proline (G-R-P) tripeptide core flanked by basic amino acids. Recent reports documented variations in the sequence of AT-hooks and revealed RNA binding activity of some canonical AT-hooks, suggesting a higher structural and functional variability of this protein domain than previously anticipated. Here we describe the discovery and characterization of the extended AT-hook peptide motif (eAT-hook), in which basic amino acids appear symmetrical mainly at a distance of 12-15 amino acids from the G-R-P core. We identified 80 human and 60 mouse eAT-hook proteins and biochemically characterized the eAT-hooks of Tip5/BAZ2A, PTOV1 and GPBP1. Microscale thermophoresis and electrophoretic mobility shift assays reveal the nucleic acid binding features of this peptide motif, and show that eAT-hooks bind RNA with one order of magnitude higher affinity than DNA. In addition, cellular localization studies suggest a role for the N-terminal eAT-hook of PTOV1 in nucleocytoplasmic shuttling. In summary, our findings classify the eAT-hook as a novel nucleic acid binding motif, which potentially mediates various RNA-dependent cellular processes.
The proper formation of dendritic arbors is a critical step in neural circuit formation, and as such defects in arborization are associated with a variety of neurodevelopmental disorders. Among the best gene candidates are those encoding cell adhesion molecules, including members of the diverse cadherin superfamily characterized by distinctive, repeated adhesive domains in their extracellular regions. Protocadherins (Pcdhs) make up the largest group within this superfamily, encompassing over 80 genes, including the ∼60 genes of the α-, β-, and γ-Pcdh gene clusters and the non-clustered δ-Pcdh genes. An additional group includes the atypical cadherin genes encoding the giant Fat and Dachsous proteins and the 7-transmembrane cadherins. In this review we highlight the many roles that Pcdhs and atypical cadherins have been demonstrated to play in dendritogenesis, dendrite arborization, and dendritic spine regulation. Together, the published studies we discuss implicate these members of the cadherin superfamily as key regulators of dendrite development and function, and as potential therapeutic targets for future interventions in neurodevelopmental disorders.
X-linked intellectual disability (XLID) is a clinically and genetically heterogeneous disorder. During the past two decades in excess of 100 X-chromosome ID genes have been identified. Yet, a large number of families mapping to the X-chromosome remained unresolved suggesting that more XLID genes or loci are yet to be identified. Here, we have investigated 405 unresolved families with XLID. We employed massively parallel sequencing of all X-chromosome exons in the index males. The majority of these males were previously tested negative for copy number variations and for mutations in a subset of known XLID genes by Sanger sequencing. In total, 745 X-chromosomal genes were screened. After stringent filtering, a total of 1297 non-recurrent exonic variants remained for prioritization. Co-segregation analysis of potential clinically relevant changes revealed that 80 families (20%) carried pathogenic variants in established XLID genes. In 19 families, we detected likely causative protein truncating and missense variants in 7 novel and validated XLID genes (CLCN4, CNKSR2, FRMPD4, KLHL15, LAS1L, RLIM and USP27X) and potentially deleterious variants in 2 novel candidate XLID genes (CDK16 and TAF1). We show that the CLCN4 and CNKSR2 variants impair protein functions as indicated by electrophysiological studies and altered differentiation of cultured primary neurons from Clcn4(-/-) mice or after mRNA knock-down. The newly identified and candidate XLID proteins belong to pathways and networks with established roles in cognitive function and intellectual disability in particular. We suggest that systematic sequencing of all X-chromosomal genes in a cohort of patients with genetic evidence for X-chromosome locus involvement may resolve up to 58% of Fragile X-negative cases.Molecular Psychiatry advance online publication, 3 February 2015; doi:10.1038/mp.2014.193.
Recent consensus on the definition, phenomenology and classification of dystonia centres around phenomenology and guides our diagnostic approach for the heterogeneous group of dystonias. Current terminology classifies conditions where dystonia is the sole motor feature (apart from tremor) as 'isolated dystonia', while 'combined dystonia' refers to dystonias with other accompanying movement disorders. This review highlights recent advances in the genetics of some isolated and combined dystonic syndromes. Some genes, such as ANO3, GNAL and CIZ1, have been discovered for isolated dystonia, but they are probably not a common cause of classic cervical dystonia. Conversely, the phenotype associated with TUBB4A mutations expanded from that of isolated dystonia to a syndrome of hypomyelination with atrophy of the basal ganglia and cerebellum (H-ABC syndrome). Similarly, ATP1A3 mutations cause a wide phenotypic spectrum ranging from rapid-onset dystonia-parkinsonism to alternating hemiplegia of childhood. Other entities entailing dystonia-parkinsonism include dopamine transporter deficiency syndrome (SLC63 mutations); dopa-responsive dystonias; young-onset parkinsonism (PARKIN, PINK1 and DJ-1 mutations); PRKRA mutations; and X-linked TAF1 mutations, which rarely can also manifest in women. Clinical and genetic heterogeneity also characterizes myoclonus-dystonia, which includes not only the classical phenotype associated with epsilon-sarcoglycan mutations but rarely also presentation of ANO3 gene mutations, TITF1 gene mutations typically underlying benign hereditary chorea, and some dopamine synthesis pathway conditions due to GCH1 and TH mutations. Thus, new genes are being recognized for isolated dystonia, and the phenotype of known genes is broadening and now involves different combined dystonia syndromes.
Genetic mutations are known to drive cancer progression and certain tumors have mutation signatures that reflect exposures to environmental carcinogens. Benzo[a]pyrene (BaP) has a known mutation signature and has proven capable of inducing changes to DNA sequence that drives normal pre-stasis human mammary epithelial cells (HMEC) past a first tumor suppressor barrier (stasis) and toward immortality. We analyzed normal, pre-stasis HMEC, three independent BaP-derived post-stasis HMEC strains (184Aa, 184Be, 184Ce) and two of their immortal derivatives(184A1 and 184BE1) by whole exome sequencing. The independent post-stasis strains exhibited between 93 and 233 BaP-induced mutations in exons. Seventy percent of the mutations were C:G>A:T transversions, consistent with the known mutation spectrum of BaP. Mutations predicted to impact protein function occurred in several known and putative cancer drivers including p16, PLCG1, MED12, TAF1 in 184Aa; PIK3CG, HSP90AB1, WHSC1L1, LCP1 in 184Be and FANCA, LPP in 184Ce. Biological processes that typically harbor cancer driver mutations such as cell cycle, regulation of cell death and proliferation, RNA processing, chromatin modification and DNA repair were found to have mutations predicted to impact function in each of the post-stasis strains. Spontaneously immortalized HMEC lines derived from two of the BaP-derived post-stasis strains shared greater than 95% of their BaP-induced mutations with their precursor cells. These immortal HMEC had 10 or fewer additional point mutations relative to their post-stasis precursors, but acquired chromosomal anomalies during immortalization that arose independent of BaP. The results of this study indicate that acute exposures of HMEC to high dose BaP recapitulate mutation patterns of human tumors and can induce mutations in a number of cancer driver genes.
The general transcription factor IID (TFIID) initiates RNA polymerase II-mediated eukaryotic transcription by nucleating pre-initiation complex formation at the core promoter of protein-encoding genes. TAF1, the largest integral subunit of TFIID, contains an evolutionarily conserved yet poorly characterized central core domain, whose specific mutation disrupts cell proliferation in the temperature-sensitive mutant hamster cell line ts13. Although the impaired TAF1 function in the ts13 mutant has been associated with defective transcriptional regulation of cell cycle genes, the mechanism by which TAF1 mediates transcription as part of TFIID remains unclear. Here, we present the crystal structure of the human TAF1 central core domain in complex with another conserved TFIID subunit, TAF7, which biochemically solubilizes TAF1. The TAF1-TAF7 complex displays an inter-digitated compact architecture, featuring an unexpected TAF1 winged helix (WH) domain mounted on top of a heterodimeric triple barrel. The single TAF1 residue altered in the ts13 mutant is buried at the junction of these two structural domains. We show that the TAF1 WH domain has intrinsic DNA-binding activity, which depends on characteristic residues that are commonly used by WH fold proteins for interacting with DNA. Importantly, mutations of these residues not only compromise DNA binding by TAF1, but also abrogate its ability to rescue the ts13 mutant phenotype. Together, our results resolve the structural organization of the TAF1-TAF7 module in TFIID and unveil a critical promoter-binding function of TAF1 in transcription regulation.
BET bromodomain inhibition has contributed new insights into gene regulation and emerged as a promising therapeutic strategy in cancer. Structural analogy of early methyl-triazolo BET inhibitors has prompted a need for structurally dissimilar ligands as probes of bromodomain function. Using fluorous-tagged multicomponent reactions, we developed a focused chemical library of bromodomain inhibitors around a 3,5-dimethylisoxazole biasing element with micromolar biochemical IC50. Iterative synthesis and biochemical assessment allowed optimization of novel BET bromodomain inhibitors based on an imidazo[1,2-a]pyrazine scaffold. Lead compound 32 (UMB-32) binds BRD4 with a Kd of 550 nM and 724 nM cellular potency in BRD4-dependent lines. Additionally, compound 32 shows potency against TAF1, a bromodomain-containing transcription factor previously unapproached by discovery chemistry. Compound 32 was cocrystallized with BRD4, yielding a 1.56 Å resolution crystal structure. This research showcases new applications of fluorous and multicomponent chemical synthesis for the development of novel epigenetic inhibitors.
This study was designed to analyse the effects of human (h) and bovine lactoferrin (bLF) on the growth and differentiation of intestinal cells using the mice model supplemented with Lactoferrin (LF) and the enterocyte-like model of Caco-2 cells which spontaneously differentiate after confluency. In mice, bLF supplementation increased jejunal villus height and the expression of several intestinal brush border membrane enzymes activities. Addition of bLF or hLF to undifferentiated Caco-2 cells was able to increase cell proliferation with confluency being reached more rapidly. Moreover, when Caco-2 cells were grown in the presence of LF for 3 weeks, brush-border membrane-associated enzyme activities i.e. sucrase, alkaline phosphatase and neutral aminopeptidase, as well as the L-glutamate transporter expression were all increased indicating an increased Caco-2 cell differentiation. Accordingly, cDNA Atlas array and Western blot analysis of cell cycle proteins shown a decreased expression of Cdck2 and an increased TAF1 expression; these proteins being implicated in the regulation of numerous genes related to cellular proliferation and differentiation. These modifications were associated with an inhibition of Caco-2 cell spontaneous apoptosis. Altogether, our results indicate that LF increase in vivo and in vitro enterocyte differentiation. In addition, LF was found to increase in vitro enterocyte proliferation resulting in higher cell density in cell flasks, an effect that was likely partly due to a reduction of the cellular apoptosis. The different stimulation patterns observed for the different parameters associated with cell differentiation in relationship with specific gene regulation is discussed.
Transcription factor II D (TFIID) is a multiprotein complex that nucleates formation of the basal transcription machinery. TATA binding protein-associated factors 1 and 7 (TAF1 and TAF7), two subunits of TFIID, are integral to the regulation of eukaryotic transcription initiation and play key roles in preinitiation complex (PIC) assembly. Current models suggest that TAF7 acts as a dissociable inhibitor of TAF1 histone acetyltransferase activity and that this event ensures appropriate assembly of the RNA polymerase II-mediated PIC before transcriptional initiation. Here, we report the 3D structure of a complex of yeast TAF1 with TAF7 at 2.9 Å resolution. The structure displays novel architecture and is characterized by a large predominantly hydrophobic heterodimer interface and extensive cofolding of TAF subunits. There are no obvious similarities between TAF1 and known histone acetyltransferases. Instead, the surface of the TAF1-TAF7 complex contains two prominent conserved surface pockets, one of which binds selectively to an inhibitory trimethylated histone H3 mark on Lys27 in a manner that is also regulated by phosphorylation at the neighboring H3 serine. Our findings could point toward novel roles for the TAF1-TAF7 complex in regulation of PIC assembly via reading epigenetic histone marks.
Methylphenidate is the most commonly used stimulant drug for the treatment of attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder (ADHD). Research has found that methylphenidate is a "reinforcer" and that individuals with ADHD also abuse this medication. Nevertheless, the molecular consequences of long-term recreational methylphenidate use or abuse in individuals with ADHD are not yet fully known.
Spontaneously hypertensive rats (SHR), the most validated and widely used ADHD animal model, were pretreated with methylphenidate (5 mg/kg, i.p.) during their adolescence (post-natal day [PND] 42-48) and tested for subsequent methylphenidate-induced conditioned place preference (CPP) and self-administration. Thereafter, the differentially expressed genes in the prefrontal cortex (PFC) and striatum of representative methylphenidate-treated SHRs, which showed CPP to and self-administration of methylphenidate, were analyzed.
Genome-wide transcriptome profiling analyses revealed 30 differentially expressed genes in the PFC, which include transcripts involved in apoptosis (e.g. S100a9, Angptl4, Nfkbia), transcription (Cebpb, Per3), and neuronal plasticity (Homer1, Jam2, Asap1). In contrast, 306 genes were differentially expressed in the striatum and among them, 252 were downregulated. The main functional categories overrepresented among the downregulated genes include those involved in cell adhesion (e.g. Pcdh10, Ctbbd1, Itgb6), positive regulation of apoptosis (Perp, Taf1, Api5), (Notch3, Nsbp1, Sik1), mitochondrion organization (Prps18c, Letm1, Uqcrc2), and ubiquitin-mediated proteolysis (Nedd4, Usp27x, Ube2d2).
Together, these changes indicate methylphenidate-induced neurotoxicity, altered synaptic and neuronal plasticity, energy metabolism and ubiquitin-dependent protein degradation in the brains of methylphenidate-treated SHRs, which showed methylphenidate CPP and self-administration. In addition, these findings may also reflect cognitive impairment associated with chronic methylphenidate use as demonstrated in preclinical studies. Future studies are warranted to determine the clinical significance of the present findings with regard to long-term recreational methylphenidate use or abuse in individuals with ADHD.
The SET-NUP214 (TAF1/CAN) fusion gene is a rare genetic event in T-cell acute lymphoblastic leukemia (T-ALL). Eleven (6%) of 196 T-ALL patients enrolled in the French Group for Research on Adult Acute Lymphoblastic Leukemia (GRAALL) 2003 and 2005 trials harbored a SET-NUP214 transcript. SET-NUP214-positive patients were predominantly (10 [91%] of 11) T-cell receptor (TCR)-negative and strikingly associated with TCRγδ lineage T-ALLs, as defined by expression of TCRγδ, TCRδ and/or TCRγ rearrangements but no complete TCRβ variable diversity joining rearrangement in surface CD3/TCR-negative cases. When compared with SET-NUP214-negative patients, SET-NUP214-positive patients showed a significantly higher rate of corticosteroid resistance (91% vs 44%; P = .003) and chemotherapy resistance (100% vs 44%; P = .0001). All SET-NUP214-positive patients but one achieved complete remission, and 9 were allografted. Despite the poor early-treatment sensitivity, the outcome of SET-NUP214-positive patients was similar to that of SET-NUP214-negative patients.
Class II transcription initiation is a highly regulated process and requires the assembly of a pre-initiation complex (PIC) containing DNA template, RNA polymerase II (RNAPII), general transcription factors (GTFs) TFIIA, TFIIB, TFIID, TFIIE, TFIIF, TFIIH and Mediator. RNAPII, TFIID, TFIIH and Mediator are large multiprotein complexes, each containing 10 and more subunits. Altogether, the PIC is made up of about 60 polypeptides with a combined molecular weight of close to 4MDa. Recent structural studies of key PIC components have significantly advanced our understanding of transcription initiation. TFIID was shown to bind promoter DNA in a reorganized state. The architecture of a core-TFIID complex was elucidated. Crystal structures of the TATA-binding protein (TBP) bound to TBP-associated factor 1 (TAF1), RNAPII-TFIIB complexes and the Mediator head module were solved. The overall architectures of large PIC assemblies from human and yeast have been determined by electron microscopy (EM). Here we review these latest structural insights into the architecture and assembly of the PIC, which reveal exciting new mechanistic details of transcription initiation.
Class II transactivator (CIITA) is a transcriptional coactivator that regulates γ-interferon-activated transcription of Major Histocompatibility Complex (MHC) class I and II genes. As such, it plays a critical role in immune responses: CIITA deficiency results in aberrant MHC gene expression and consequently in autoimmune diseases such as Type II bare lymphocyte syndrome. Although CIITA does not bind DNA directly, it regulates MHC transcription in two distinct ways - as a transcriptional activator and as a general transcription factor. As an activator, CIITA nucleates an enhanceosome consisting of the DNA binding transcription factors RFX, cyclic AMP response element binding protein, and NF-Y. As a general transcription factor, CIITA functionally replaces the TFIID component, TAF1. Like TAF1, CIITA possesses acetyltransferase (AT) and kinase activities, both of which contribute to proper transcription of MHC class I and II genes. The substrate specificity and regulation of the CIITA AT and kinase activities also parallel those of TAF1. In addition, CIITA is tightly regulated by its various regulatory domains that undergo phosphorylation and influence its targeted localization. Thus, a complex picture of the mechanisms regulating CIITA function is emerging suggesting that CIITA has dual roles in transcriptional regulation which are summarized in this review.
While p53 activation has long been studied, the mechanisms by which its targets genes are restored to their preactivation state are less clear. We report here that TAF1 phosphorylates p53 at Thr55, leading to dissociation of p53 from the p21 promoter and inactivation of transcription late in the DNA damage response. We further show that cellular ATP level might act as a molecular switch for Thr55 phosphorylation on the p21 promoter, indicating that TAF1 is a cellular ATP sensor. Upon DNA damage, cells undergo PARP-1-dependent ATP depletion, which is correlated with reduced TAF1 kinase activity and Thr55 phosphorylation, resulting in p21 activation. As cellular ATP levels recover, TAF1 is able to phosphorylate p53 on Thr55, which leads to dissociation of p53 from the p21 promoter. ChIP-sequencing analysis reveals p53 dissociates from promoters genome wide as cells recover from DNA damage, suggesting the general nature of this mechanism.
While Hermann Oppenheim probably described the first cases of genetic (DYT1) dystonia in 1911, the 'modern history' of dystonia genetics dates back to 1994 when mutations in the GTP cyclohydrolase I gene were discovered to cause dopa-responsive dystonia. Due to the advent of next-generation sequencing, the field of dystonia genetics has been evolving very rapidly over the past two years, resulting in the reporting of 'DYT1-25' and, for the first time, in the identification of genes associated with adult-onset focal/segmental dystonia. However, three of these putative new genes still await independent confirmation (TUBB4/DYT4; CIZ1/DYT23; ANO3/DYT24) and only 11 'DYT' genes have been unequivocally demonstrated to cause different forms of dystonia. Based on a recent consensus approach, dystonias are subdivided on clinical grounds into isolated (with or without tremor) and combined (with other movement disorders) forms. Confirmed genes for isolated dystonias include TOR1A/DYT1; THAP1/DYT6; GNAL/DYT25. In the combined forms, dystonia is accompanied by parkinsonism (GCH1/DYT5a; TH/DYT5b; ATP1A3/DYT12; TAF1/DYT3) or myoclonus (SGCE/DYT11). Persistent and paroxysmal forms are distinguished according to their temporal pattern. The paroxysmal forms of dystonia/dyskinesias present with a mixed pattern of hyperkinetic movement disorders (PRRT2/DYT10; MR-1/DYT8; SLC2A1/DYT18).
The purpose of this review is to provide an update on the classification, phenomenology, pathophysiology, and treatment of dystonia.
A revised definition based on the main phenomenologic features of dystonia has recently been developed in an expert consensus approach. Classification is based on two main axes: clinical features and etiology. Currently, genes have been reported for 14 types of monogenic isolated and combined dystonia. Isolated dystonia (with dystonic tremor) can be caused by mutations in TOR1A (DYT1), TUBB4 (DYT4), THAP1 (DYT6), PRKRA (DYT16), CIZ1 (DYT23), ANO3 (DYT24), and GNAL (DYT25). Combined dystonias (with parkinsonism or myoclonus) are further subdivided into persistent (GCHI [DYT5], SGCE [DYT11], and ATP1A3 [DYT12], with TAF1 most likely but not yet proven to be linked to DYT3) and paroxysmal (PNKD [DYT8], PRRT2 [DYT10], and SLC2A1 [DYT18]). Recent insights from neurophysiologic studies identified functional abnormalities in two networks in dystonia: the basal ganglia-sensorimotor network and, more recently, the cerebellothalamocortical pathway. Besides the well-known lack of inhibition at different CNS levels, dystonia is specifically characterized by maladaptive plasticity in the sensorimotor cortex and loss of cortical surround inhibition. The exact role (modulatory or compensatory) of the cerebellar-cortical pathways still has to be further elucidated. In addition to botulinum toxin for focal forms, deep brain stimulation of the globus pallidus internus is increasingly recognized as an effective treatment for generalized and segmental dystonia.
The revised classification and identification of new genes for different forms of dystonia, including adult-onset segmental dystonia, enable an improved diagnostic approach. Recent pathophysiologic insights have fundamentally contributed to a better understanding of the disease mechanisms and impact on treatment, such as functional neurosurgery and nonpharmacologic treatment options.
The Major Histocompatibility Complex (MHC) class II transactivator (CIITA) mediates activated immune responses and its deficiency results in the Type II Bare Lymphocyte Syndrome. CIITA is a transcriptional co-activator that regulates γ-interferon-activated transcription of MHC class I and class II genes. It is also a functional homolog of TAF1, a component of the general transcription factor complex TFIID. TAF1 and CIITA both possess intrinsic acetyltransferase (AT) activity that is required for transcription initiation. In response to induction by γ-interferon, CIITA and it's AT activity bypass the requirement for TAF1 AT activity. TAF1 also has kinase activity that is essential for its function. However, no similar activity has been identified for CIITA thus far. Here we report that CIITA, like TAF1, is a serine-threonine kinase. Its substrate specificity parallels, but does not duplicate, that of TAF1 in phosphorylating the TFIID component TAF7, the RAP74 subunit of the general transcription factor TFIIF and histone H2B. Like TAF1, CIITA autophosphorylates, affecting its interaction with TAF7. Additionally, CIITA phosphorylates histone H2B at Ser36, a target of TAF1 that is required for transcription during cell cycle progression and stress response. However, unlike TAF1, CIITA also phosphorylates all the other histones. The identification of this novel kinase activity of CIITA further clarifies its role as a functional homolog of TAF1 which may operate during stress and γ-IFN activated MHC gene transcription.
The general transcription factor TFIID provides a regulatory platform for transcription initiation. Here we present the crystal structure (1.97 Å) and NMR analysis of yeast TAF1 N-terminal domains TAND1 and TAND2 bound to yeast TBP, together with mutational data. We find that yeast TAF1-TAND1, which in itself acts as a transcriptional activator, binds TBP's concave DNA-binding surface by presenting similar anchor residues to TBP as does Mot1 but from a distinct structural scaffold. Furthermore, we show how TAF1-TAND2 uses an aromatic and acidic anchoring pattern to bind a conserved TBP surface groove traversing the basic helix region, and we find highly similar TBP-binding motifs also presented by the structurally distinct TFIIA, Mot1 and Brf1 proteins. Our identification of these anchoring patterns, which can be easily disrupted or enhanced, provides insight into the competitive multiprotein TBP interplay critical to transcriptional regulation.
Transcription activation in yeast (Saccharomyces cerevisiae) involves ordered recruitment of transcription factor complexes, such as TFIID, SAGA, and Mot1p. Previously, we showed that both Mot1p and Taf1p are recruited to the HXT2 and HXT4 genes, which encode hexose transporter proteins. Here, we show that SAGA also binds to the HXT2 and HXT4 promoters and plays a pivotal role in the recruitment of Mot1p and Taf1p. The deletion of either SPT3 or SPT8 reduces Mot1p binding to HXT2 and HXT4. Surprisingly, the deletion of GCN5 reduces Taf1p binding to both promoters. When GCN5 is deleted in spt3Delta or spt8Delta strains, neither Mot1p nor Taf1p binds, and this results in a diminished recruitment of TATA binding protein and polymerase II to the HXT4 but not the HXT2 promoter. This is reflected by the SAGA-dependent expression of HXT4. In contrast, SAGA-independent induction of HXT2 suggests a functional redundancy with other factors. A functional interplay of different SAGA subunits with Mot1p and Taf1p was supported by phenotypic analysis of MOT1 SAGA or TAF1/SAGA double mutant strains, which revealed novel genetic interactions between MOT1 and SPT8 and between TAF1 and GCN5. In conclusion, our data demonstrate functional links between SAGA, Mot1p, and TFIID in HXT gene regulation.
Mot1 is an essential Snf2/Swi2-related ATPase and TATA-binding protein (TBP)-associated factor (TAF). In vitro, Mot1 utilizes ATP hydrolysis to disrupt TBP-DNA complexes, but the relationship of this activity to Mot1's in vivo function is unclear. Chromatin immunoprecipitation was used to determine how Mot1 affects the assembly of preinitiation complexes (PICs) at Mot1-controlled promoters in vivo. We find that the Mot1-repressed HSP26 and INO1 promoters are both regulated by TBP recruitment; inactivation of Mot1 leads to increased PIC formation coincident with derepression of transcription. For the Mot1-activated genes BNA1 and URA1, inactivation of Mot1 also leads, remarkably, to increased TBP binding to the promoters, despite the fact that transcription of these genes is obliterated in mot1 cells. In contrast, levels of Taf1, TFIIB, and RNA polymerase II are reduced at Mot1-activated promoters in mot1 cells. These results suggest that Mot1-mediated displacement of TBP underlies its mechanism of repression and activation at these genes. We suggest that at activated promoters, Mot1 disassembles transcriptionally inactive TBP, thereby facilitating the formation of a TBP complex that supports functional PIC assembly.
Organisms respond to heat stress by reprogramming gene expression. In Saccharomyces cerevisiae, heat-induced genes tend to be regulated by factors that belong to the Spt-Ada-Gcn5 acetyltransferase (SAGA) transcription regulatory pathway, whereas heat-repressed genes tend to be regulated by a parallel pathway involving transcription factor IID (TFIID). Here, we examine whether heat stress affects the occupancy of representative factors of each pathway at promoter regions throughout the yeast genome. Representatives of the SAGA pathway include the TATA binding protein, Spt3, and Mot1. Representatives of the TFIID pathway include the TATA binding protein, TAF1, and Bdf1. We find that heat stress causes disassembly of the TFIID pathway at genes that are inhibited by stress. In contrast, heat induces assembly of the SAGA pathway at stress-induced genes, although many also assemble along the TFIID pathway. Other genes were found to assemble almost exclusively along the TFIID pathway. Strikingly, these genes are lowly transcribed and are generally not induced. Thus, heat stress leads to factor assembly along each pathway but with distinct transcriptional outcomes. Further investigation of these pathways reveals that Bdf1 and Mot1 negatively regulate the SAGA pathway in different ways. The findings suggest that Bdf1 blocks assembly, whereas Mot1 promotes disassembly of the transcription machinery.
The TATA binding protein (TBP) is a central component of the eukaryotic transcription machinery and is subjected to both positive and negative regulation. As is evident from structural and functional studies, TBP's concave DNA binding surface is inhibited by a number of potential mechanisms, including homodimerization and binding to the TAND domain of the TFIID subunit TAF1 (yTAF(II)145/130). Here we further characterized these interactions by creating mutations at 24 amino acids within the Saccharomyces cerevisiae TBP crystallographic dimer interface. These mutants are impaired for dimerization, TAF1 TAND binding, and TATA binding to an extent that is consistent with the crystal or nuclear magnetic resonance structure of these or related interactions. In vivo, these mutants displayed a variety of phenotypes, the severity of which correlated with relative dimer instability in vitro. The phenotypes included a low steady-state level of the mutant TBP, transcriptional derepression, dominant slow growth (partial toxicity), and synthetic toxicity in combination with a deletion of the TAF1 TAND domain. These phenotypes cannot be accounted for by defective interactions with other known TBP inhibitors and likely reflect defects in TBP dimerization.
Recruitment of TATA-binding protein (TBP) is central to activation of transcription by RNA polymerase II (pol II). This depends upon co-activator proteins including TBP-associated factors (TAFs). Yeast Mot1p was identified as a general transcriptional repressor in genetic screens and is also found associated with TBP. To obtain insight into Mot1p function in vivo, we determined the mRNA expression profile of the mot1-1 temperature-sensitive (Ts) strain. Unexpectedly, this indicated that Mot1p mostly plays a positive role for transcription. For one potential activation target, HXT2, we analyzed promoter recruitment of Mot1p, TBP, Taf1p (Taf130p) and pol II by chromatin immunoprecipitation assays. Whereas TBP becomes stably associated upon activation of the HXT2 and HXT4 promoters, Mot1p showed only a transient association. TBP recruitment was compromised in two different mot1 mutant strains, but was only moderately affected in a taf1 Ts strain. Together, our data indicate that Mot1p can assist in recruitment of TBP on promoters during gene activation in vivo.
Eukaryotic transcriptional activators function, at least in part, by promoting assembly of the preinitiation complex, which comprises RNA polymerase II and its general transcription factors (GTFs). Activator-mediated stimulation of the assembly of the preinitiation complex has been studied in vitro but has been relatively refractory to in vivo analysis. Here we use a DNA-crosslinking/immunoprecipitation assay to study in living cells the first step in the assembly of the preinitiation complex, the interaction between the TATA-box-binding protein (TBP) and its binding site, the TATA box. Analysis of a variety of endogenous yeast genes, and of a series of activators of differing strength, reveals a general correlation between TBP binding and transcriptional activity. Using mutant yeast strains, we show that Mot1 prevents the binding of TBP to inactive promoters and that activator-mediated stimulation of TBP binding requires additional GTFs, including TFIIB and Srb4. Taken together, our results indicate that TBP binding in vivo is stringently controlled, and that the ability of activators to stimulate this step in the assembly of the preinitiation complex is a highly cooperative process involving multiple transcription factors.
The aim of our study was 1) to define if the amplification of c-MYC, MLL and RUNX1 genes is related to the progressive changes of the karyotype in patients with AML and MDS with trisomy 8, 11 and 21 (+8, +11 and +21) in bone marrow and 2) can that amplification be accepted as part of the clonal evolution (CE). Karyotype analysis was performed in 179 patients with AML or MDS with the different chromosomal aberrations (CA) aged 16-81. The findings were distributed as follow: initiating balanced CA (n = 60), aneuploidia (n = 55), unbalanced CA (n = 64). Amplification of c-MYC, MLL and RUNX1 genes by means of fluorescence in situ hybridization (FISH) was found in 35% (7 out of 20) of AML and MDS patients with +8, +11 u +21 as single CA in their karyotype; in 63.6% of pts (7 out of 11)--with additional numerical or structural CA and in 75% (9 out of 12)--with complex karyotype. We assume that the amplification of the respective chromosomal regions in patients with +8, +11 and +21 is related to CE. Considering the amplification as a factor of CE, we established 3 patterns of karyotype development depending on the type of the initiating CA in it. Significant statistical differences were found between the three patterns regarding the karyotype distribution in the different stages of progression (p < 0.001).
Haematopoietic stem and progenitor cell (HSPC) transplant is a widely used treatment for life-threatening conditions such as leukaemia; however, the molecular mechanisms regulating HSPC engraftment of the recipient niche remain incompletely understood. Here we develop a competitive HSPC transplant method in adult zebrafish, using in vivo imaging as a non-invasive readout. We use this system to conduct a chemical screen, and identify epoxyeicosatrienoic acids (EETs) as a family of lipids that enhance HSPC engraftment. The pro-haematopoietic effects of EETs were conserved in the developing zebrafish embryo, where 11,12-EET promoted HSPC specification by activating a unique activator protein 1 (AP-1) and runx1 transcription program autonomous to the haemogenic endothelium. This effect required the activation of the phosphatidylinositol-3-OH kinase (PI(3)K) pathway, specifically PI(3)Kγ. In adult HSPCs, 11,12-EET induced transcriptional programs, including AP-1 activation, which modulate several cellular processes, such as migration, to promote engraftment. Furthermore, we demonstrate that the EET effects on enhancing HSPC homing and engraftment are conserved in mammals. Our study establishes a new method to explore the molecular mechanisms of HSPC engraftment, and discovers a previously unrecognized, evolutionarily conserved pathway regulating multiple haematopoietic generation and regeneration processes. EETs may have clinical application in marrow or cord blood transplantation.
Abnormalities of the RUNX1 gene in childhood B-acute lymphoblastic leukemia (B-ALL) are manifested by ETV6-RUNX1 or RUNX1 amplification. A detailed comparison between the two regarding clinicopathologic features with genetic analysis has not been performed previously. This parallel study assessed how different RUNX1 abnormalities affect the clinicopathology of B-ALL.
We compared clinicopathologic factors, including age, sex, WBC count, cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) involvement, immunophenotype, and blast proliferation rate between B-ALL with RUNX1 amplification (10 cases) and B-ALL with ETV6-RUNX1 translocation (67 cases) in childhood B-ALL.
CD7 was often expressed in RUNX1 amplification but not in ETV6-RUNX1 (44% vs 0%, P = .0001) and appeared to correlate with CSF involvement in the former group (3/4 [75%]). CD13 was often detected in ETV6-RUNX1 with additional RUNX1 gain (38%) with an even higher frequency in double ETV6-RUNX1 translocation (77%), but was not detected in RUNX1 amplification (0%, P < .05). Children with RUNX1 amplification were older and more often CSF positive, while those with ETV6-RUNX1 were younger, more frequently had hyperleukocytosis, and had higher blast proliferation rates.
RUNX1 copy numbers seem to be proportional to the age of B-ALL onset and the frequency of CSF involvement, while RUNX1 amplification vs translocation causes aberrant expression of CD7 and CD13, respectively.
B-lymphoblastic leukemia (B-ALL) with intrachromosomal amplification of chromosome 21 (iAMP21) is a relatively uncommon manifestation of acute leukemia and limited predominantly to the pediatric population. Case-specific information regarding flow cytometric, morphologic, and laboratory findings of this subtype of leukemia is currently lacking.
We searched the databases of three large institutions for lymphoblastic leukemia with iAMP21 from 2005 through 2012 and analyzed the clinicopathologic features.
We identified 17 cases with five or more RUNX1 signals on interphase nuclei, 14 of which were consistent with the Children's Oncology Group (COG) definition for iAMP21—namely, the presence of three or more RUNX1 signals on one marker chromosome. These cases showed a statistically significant lower peripheral WBC count and older age at diagnosis compared with all pediatric cases of B-ALL. We also identified three cases with increased RUNX1 signals scattered on multiple marker chromosomes that did not meet the COG definition of iAMP21 but showed similar 21q instability and older age at presentation.
Our findings not only demonstrate that B-ALL with iAMP21 is truly a distinct clinicopathologic entity but also suggest that a subset of cases of B-ALL with iAMP21 can show variable cytogenetic features.
Proper regulation of microbial-induced cytokines is critical to intestinal immune homeostasis. Acute stimulation of nucleotide-binding oligomerization domain 2 (NOD2), the Crohn's disease-associated sensor of bacterial peptidoglycan, induces cytokines. However, chronic NOD2 stimulation in macrophages decreases cytokines upon pattern recognition receptor (PRR) restimulation; cytokine attenuation to PRR stimulation is similarly observed in intestinal macrophages. The role for the transcriptional repressors Twist1 and Twist2 in regulating PRR-induced cytokine outcomes is poorly understood and has not been reported for NOD2. We found that Twist1 and Twist2 were required for optimal cytokine downregulation during acute and, particularly, chronic NOD2 stimulation of human macrophages. Consistently, Twist1 and Twist2 expression was increased after chronic NOD2 stimulation; this increased expression was IL-10 and TGF-β dependent. Although Twist1 and Twist2 did not coregulate each other's expression, they cooperated to enhance binding to cytokine promoters after chronic NOD2 stimulation. Moreover, Twist1 and Twist2 contributed to enhance expression and promoter binding of the proinflammatory inhibitor c-Maf and the transcriptional repressor Bmi1. Restoring c-Maf and Bmi1 expression in Twist-deficient macrophages restored NOD2-induced cytokine downregulation. Furthermore, with chronic NOD2 stimulation, Twist1 and Twist2 contributed to the decreased expression and cytokine promoter binding of the transcriptional activators activating transcription factor 4, C/EBPα, Runx1, and Runx2. Knockdown of these transcriptional activators in Twist-deficient macrophages restored cytokine downregulation after chronic NOD2 stimulation. Finally, NOD2 synergized with additional PRRs to increase Twist1 and Twist2 expression and Twist-dependent pathways. Therefore, after chronic NOD2 stimulation Twist1 and Twist2 coordinate the regulation of both transcriptional activators and repressors, thereby mediating optimal cytokine downregulation.
Missing self recognition of MHC class I molecules is mediated in murine species primarily through the stochastic expression of CD94/NKG2 and Ly49 receptors on NK cells. Previous studies have suggested that the stochastic expression of Ly49 receptors is achieved through the use of an alternate upstream promoter, designated Pro1, that is active only in immature NK cells and operates via the mutually exclusive binding of transcription initiation complexes to closely opposed forward and reverse TATA boxes, with forward transcription being transiently required to activate the downstream promoters, Pro2/Pro3, that are subsequently responsible for transcription in mature NK cells. In this study, we report that Pro1 transcripts are not restricted to immature NK cells but are also found in mature NK cells and T cells, and that Pro1 fragments display strong promoter activity in mature NK cell and T cell lines as well as in immature NK cells. However, the strength of promoter activity in vitro does not correlate well with Ly49 expression in vivo and forward promoter activity is generally weak or undetectable, suggesting that components outside of Pro1 are required for efficient forward transcription. Indeed, conserved sequences immediately upstream and downstream of the core Pro1 region were found to inhibit or enhance promoter activity. Most surprisingly, promoter activity does not require either the forward or reverse TATA boxes, but is instead dependent on residues in the largely invariant central region of Pro1. Importantly, Pro1 displays strong enhancer activity, suggesting that this may be its principal function in vivo.
To evaluate the efficiency of one-step multiplex RT-PCR for identifying four common fusion transcripts (TEL/AML1, E2A/PBX1, MLL/AF4 and BCR/ABL) in children with acute lymphoblastic leukemia (ALL).
Total RNA was extracted from bone marrow samples of 76 children who were newly diagnosed with ALL between January 2003 and December 2010. These RNAs were analyzed for TEL/AML1, E2A/PBX1, MLL/AF4 and BCR/ABL by one-step multiplex RT-PCR or common nested-multiplex PCR. The PCR products were confirmed by DNA sequencing.
TEL/AML1 was found in 12 cases (the length of products was 298 bp in 9 cases and 259 bp in 3 cases), E2A/PBX1 was found in 3 cases (the length of products was 373 bp), BCR/ABL was found in 1 case (the length of products was 2 124 bp), and MLL/AF4 was found in 7 cases (the length of products was 427 bp in 1 case and 673 bp in 6 cases) using one-step multiplex RT-PCR combined with DNA sequencing. The results were consistent with those using common nested-multiplex PCR.
One-step multiplex RT-PCR may be another alternative for detection of common fusion transcripts in children with ALL.
The generation of haematopoietic stem cells (HSCs) from human pluripotent stem cells (hPSCs) will depend on the accurate recapitulation of embryonic haematopoiesis. In the early embryo, HSCs develop from the haemogenic endothelium (HE) and are specified in a Notch-dependent manner through a process named endothelial-to-haematopoietic transition (EHT). As HE is associated with arteries, it is assumed that it represents a subpopulation of arterial vascular endothelium (VE). Here we demonstrate at a clonal level that hPSC-derived HE and VE represent separate lineages. HE is restricted to the CD34(+)CD73(-)CD184(-) fraction of day 8 embryoid bodies and it undergoes a NOTCH-dependent EHT to generate RUNX1C(+) cells with multilineage potential. Arterial and venous VE progenitors, in contrast, segregate to the CD34(+)CD73(med)CD184(+) and CD34(+)CD73(hi)CD184(-) fractions, respectively. Together, these findings identify HE as distinct from VE and provide a platform for defining the signalling pathways that regulate their specification to functional HSCs.
The activity of antagonizing transcription factors represents a mechanistic paradigm of bidirectional lineage-fate control during hematopoiesis. At the megakaryocytic/erythroid bifurcation, the cross-antagonism of krueppel-like factor 1 (KLF1) and friend leukemia integration 1 (FLI1) has such a decisive role. However, how this antagonism is resolved during lineage specification is poorly understood. We found that runt-related transcription factor 1 (RUNX1) inhibits erythroid differentiation of murine megakaryocytic/erythroid progenitors and primary human CD34(+) progenitor cells. We show that RUNX1 represses the erythroid gene expression program during megakaryocytic differentiation by epigenetic repression of the erythroid master regulator KLF1. RUNX1 binding to the KLF1 locus is increased during megakaryocytic differentiation and counterbalances the activating role of T-cell acute lymphocytic leukemia 1 (TAL1). We found that corepressor recruitment by RUNX1 contributes to a block of the KLF1-dependent erythroid gene expression program. Our data indicate that the repressive function of RUNX1 influences the balance between erythroid and megakaryocytic differentiation by shifting the balance between KLF1 and FLI1 in the direction of FLI1. Taken together, we show that RUNX1 is a key player within a network of transcription factors that represses the erythroid gene expression program.
Myeloid and lymphoid neoplasms with abnormalities of fibroblast growth factor receptor 1 gene (FGFR1) are a rare and aggressive disease group that harbors translocations of FGFR1 with at least 14 recognized partner genes. We report a case of a patient with a novel t(17;21)(p13;q22) with RUNX1 rearrangement and trilineage blasts.
A 29-year-old man with relapsed T-lymphoblastic lymphoma in the cervical nodes showed a myeloproliferative neoplasm in his bone marrow with three separate populations of immunophenotypically aberrant myeloid, T-lymphoid, and B-lymphoid blasts by flow cytometry. Cytogenetic and fluorescent in situ hybridization studies showed unique dual translocations of t(8;13)(p11.2;q12) and t(17;21)(p13;q22) with RUNX1 rearrangement.
The patient was initiated on a mitoxantrone, etoposide, and cytarabine chemotherapy regimen and died of complications of disease 1 month later.
To our knowledge, this is the first reported case of a myeloid and lymphoid neoplasm with abnormalities of FGFR1 with t(17;21)(p13;q22) and trilineage blasts.
Some ribonucleases (RNases) produce selective toxic effect on the cancer cells. The mechanism of this antitumor activity remains largely unclear. The subject of this review is the RNases interaction with cellular components, resulting in the induction of apoptosis of tumor cells. Cell surface structures, which are potential acceptors of the exogenous RNase are discussed: acidic lipids and glycoproteins, heparansulfate-containing proteoglycans, actin, and RNA-associated proteins. Cell membranes of normal and malignant cells differ according to the composition of these components, which largely determines the selectivity of RNases for the latter. Different types of RNA are examined as intracellular targets of the RNases activity, evidence is presented demonstrating the possibility of exogenous RNases intervening in the process of RNA interference. The role of potassium channels, NF-kappaB-dependent.signaling pathway and various caspases in apoptosis induced by exogenous RNases is discussed. Evidence is also presented showing that the sensitivity of cells to exogenous RNases is linked to the expression of certain oncogenes, namely RAS, KIT, AML1-ETO. It is suggested that discovering the details of the mechanisms of RNases cytotoxic effect in malignant cells susceptible to their activity, will in the future serve as a foundation to developing new tools of targeted anticancer therapy.
RUNX1 (Runt-related transcription factor 1) is indispensable for the generation of hemogenic endothelium. However, the regulation of RUNX1 during this developmental process is poorly understood. We investigated the role of the histone chaperone HIRA (histone cell cycle regulation-defective homolog A) from this perspective and report that HIRA significantly contributes toward the regulation of RUNX1 in the transition of differentiating mouse embryonic stem cells from hemogenic to hematopoietic stage. Direct interaction of HIRA and RUNX1 activates the downstream targets of RUNX1 implicated in generation of hematopoietic stem cells. At the molecular level, HIRA-mediated incorporation of histone H3.3 variant within the Runx1 +24 mouse conserved noncoding element is essential for the expression of Runx1 during endothelial to hematopoietic transition. An inactive chromatin at the intronic enhancer of Runx1 in absence of HIRA significantly repressed the transition of cells from hemogenic to hematopoietic fate. We expect that the HIRA-RUNX1 axis might open up a novel approach in understanding leukemogenesis in future.
Mammalian skin is innervated by diverse, unmyelinated C fibers that are associated with senses of pain, itch, temperature, or touch. A key developmental question is how this neuronal cell diversity is generated during development. We reported previously that the runt domain transcription factor Runx1 is required to coordinate the development of these unmyelinated cutaneous sensory neurons, including VGLUT3(+) low-threshold c-mechanoreceptors (CLTMs), MrgprD(+) polymodal nociceptors, MrgprA3(+) pruriceptors, MrgprB4(+) c-mechanoreceptors, and others. However, how these Runx1-dependent cutaneous sensory neurons are further segregated is poorly illustrated. Here, we find that the Runx1-dependent transcription factor gene Zfp521 is expressed in, and required for establishing molecular features that define, VGLUT3(+) CLTMs. Furthermore, Runx1 and Zfp521 form a classic incoherent feedforward loop (I-FFL) in controlling molecular identities that normally belong to MrgprD(+) neurons, with Runx1 and Zfp51 playing activator and repressor roles, respectively (in genetic terms). A knock-out of Zfp521 allows prospective VGLUT3 lineage neurons to acquire MrgprD(+) neuron identities. Furthermore, Runx1 might form other I-FFLs to regulate the expression of MrgprA3 and MrgprB4, a mechanism preventing these genes from being expressed in Runx1-persistent VGLUT3(+) and MrgprD(+) neurons. The evolvement of these I-FFLs provides an explanation for how modality-selective sensory subtypes are formed during development and may also have intriguing implications for sensory neuron evolution and sensory coding.
Runx1 is a transcription factor essential for definitive hematopoiesis, and genetic abnormalities in Runx1 cause leukemia. Runx1 is functionally promiscuous and acts as either an oncogene or tumor suppressor gene in certain epithelial cancers. Recent evidence suggests that Runx1 is an important factor in breast cancer, however, its role remains ambiguous. Here, we addressed whether Runx1 has a specific pathological role during breast cancer progression and show that Runx1 has an oncogenic function. We observed elevated Runx1 expression in a subset of human breast cancers. Furthermore, throughout the course of disease progression in a classical mouse model of breast cancer (i.e., the MMTV-PyMT transgenic model), Runx1 expression increases in the primary site (mammary gland) and is further upregulated in tumors and distal lung metastatic lesions. Ex vivo studies using tumor epithelial cells derived from these mice express significantly higher levels of Runx1 than normal mammary epithelial cells. The tumor cells exhibit increased rates of migration and invasion, indicative of an aggressive cancer phenotype. Inhibition of Runx1 expression using RNA interference significantly abrogates these cancer-relevant phenotypic characteristics. Importantly, our data establish that Runx1 contributes to murine mammary tumor development and malignancy and potentially represents a key disease-promoting and prognostic factor in human breast cancer progression and metastasis.
The CD69 type II C-type lectin is one of the earliest indicators of leukocyte activation acting in lymphocyte migration and cytokine secretion. CD69 expression in hematopoietic lineage undergoes rapid changes depending on the cell-lineage, the activation state or the localization of the cell where it is expressed, suggesting a complex and tightly controlled regulation. Here we provide new insights on the transcriptional regulation of CD69 gene in mammal species. Through in silico studies, we analyzed several regulatory features of the 4 upstream conserved non-coding sequences (CNS 1-4) previously described, confirming a major function of CNS2 in the transcriptional regulation of CD69. In addition, multiple transcription binding sites are identified in the CNS2 region by DNA cross-species conservation analysis. By functional approaches we defined a core region of 226bp located within CNS2 as the main enhancer element of CD69 transcription in the hematopoietic cells analyzed. By chromatin immunoprecipitation, binding of RUNX1 to the core-CNS2 was shown in a T cell line. In addition, we found an activating but not essential role of RUNX1 in CD69 gene transcription by site-directed mutagenesis and RNA silencing, probably through the interaction with this potent enhancer specifically in the hematopoietic lineage. In summary, in this study we contribute with new evidences to the landscape of the transcriptional regulation of the CD69 gene.
The adult blood system is established by hematopoietic stem cells (HSCs), which arise during development from an endothelial-to-hematopoietic transition of cells comprising the floor of the dorsal aorta. Expression of aortic runx1 has served as an early marker of HSC commitment in the zebrafish embryo, but recent studies have suggested that HSC specification begins during the convergence of posterior lateral plate mesoderm (PLM), well before aorta formation and runx1 transcription. Further understanding of the earliest stages of HSC specification necessitates an earlier marker of hemogenic endothelium. Studies in mice have suggested that GATA2 might function at early stages within hemogenic endothelium. Two orthologs of Gata2 exist in zebrafish: gata2a and gata2b. Here, we report that gata2b expression initiates during the convergence of PLM, becoming restricted to emerging HSCs. We observe Notch-dependent gata2b expression within the hemogenic subcompartment of the dorsal aorta that is in turn required to initiate runx1 expression. Our results indicate that Gata2b functions within hemogenic endothelium from an early stage, whereas Gata2a functions more broadly throughout the vascular system.
CCAAT/enhancer binding protein α (C/EBPα) dimerizes via its leucine zipper (LZ) domain to bind DNA via its basic region and activate transcription via N-terminal trans-activation domains. The activity of C/EBPα is modulated by several serine/threonine kinases and via sumoylation, its gene is activated by RUNX1 and additional transcription factors, its mRNA stability is modified by miRNAs, and its mRNA is subject to translation control that affects AUG selection. In addition to inducing differentiation, C/EBPα inhibits cell cycle progression and apoptosis. Within hematopoiesis, C/EBPα levels increase as long-term stem cells progress to granulocyte-monocyte progenitors (GMP). Absence of C/EBPα prevents GMP formation, and higher levels are required for granulopoiesis compared to monopoiesis. C/EBPα interacts with AP-1 proteins to bind hybrid DNA elements during monopoiesis, and induction of Gfi-1, C/EBPε, KLF5, and miR-223 by C/EBPα enables granulopoiesis. The CEBPA ORF is mutated in approximately 10 % of acute myeloid leukemias (AML), leading to expression of N-terminally truncated C/EBPαp30 and C-terminal, in-frame C/EBPαLZ variants, which inhibit C/EBPα activities but also play additional roles during myeloid transformation. RUNX1 mutation, CEBPA promoter methylation, Trib1 or Trib2-mediated C/EBPαp42 degradation, and signaling pathways leading to C/EBPα serine 21 phosphorylation reduce C/EBPα expression or activity in additional AML cases.
The differentiation from multipotent hematopoietic stem cells (HSC) to mature and functional blood cells requires the finely tuned regulation of gene expression at each stage of development. Specific transcription factors play a key role in this process as they modulate the expression of their target genes in an exquisitely lineage-specific manner. A large number of important transcriptional regulators have been identified which establish and maintain specific gene expression patterns during hematopoietic development. Hematopoiesis is therefore a paradigm for investigating how transcription factors function in mammalian cells, thanks also to the evolution of genome-wide and the next-generation sequencing technologies. In this review, we focus on the current knowledge of the biological and functional properties of the hematopoietic master regulator RUNX1 (also known as AML1, CBFA2, PEBP2aB) transcription factor and its main downstream target PU.1. We will outline their relationship in determining the fate of the myeloid lineage during normal stem cell development and under conditions when hematopoietic development is subverted by leukemic transformation.
Acute myeloid leukemia (AML) is the most common form of adult leukemia. The transcription factor fusion CBFβ-SMMHC (core binding factor β and the smooth-muscle myosin heavy chain), expressed in AML with the chromosome inversion inv(16)(p13q22), outcompetes wild-type CBFβ for binding to the transcription factor RUNX1, deregulates RUNX1 activity in hematopoiesis, and induces AML. Current inv(16) AML treatment with nonselective cytotoxic chemotherapy results in a good initial response but limited long-term survival. Here, we report the development of a protein-protein interaction inhibitor, AI-10-49, that selectively binds to CBFβ-SMMHC and disrupts its binding to RUNX1. AI-10-49 restores RUNX1 transcriptional activity, displays favorable pharmacokinetics, and delays leukemia progression in mice. Treatment of primary inv(16) AML patient blasts with AI-10-49 triggers selective cell death. These data suggest that direct inhibition of the oncogenic CBFβ-SMMHC fusion protein may be an effective therapeutic approach for inv(16) AML, and they provide support for transcription factor targeted therapy in other cancers.
Single nucleotide polymorphism (SNP) rs11671784 is in the loop of pre-miR-27a and the G/A variation can significantly decrease mature miR-27a expression. This study explored the role of miR-27a in chemo-sensitivity of bladder cancer and how rs11671784 G/A variation affects the sensitivity. Blood and tumor samples from 89 bladder cancer cases were analyzed. In-vitro study was performed to explore the mechanism of chemo-sensitivity and the downstream target of miR-27a by using bladder cancer cell lines. This study identified a causative relationship between rs11671784 G/A variation, lowered miR-27a expression, increased RUNX-1 expression and following weakened chemo-sensitivity. rs11671784 G allele has significantly stronger effect over A allele in promoting chemo-sensitivity in bladder cancer. miR-27a mediates chemotherapy at least partially through reducing P-gp expression and increasing apoptosis. In addition, RUNX-1 is a novel direct target of miR-27a, which is involved in its regulation of chemo-sensitivity in bladder cancer.
MTG16, MTGR1 and ETO are nuclear transcriptional corepressors of the human ETO protein family. MTG16 is implicated in hematopoietic development and in controlling erythropoiesis/megakaryopoiesis. Furthermore, ETO homologue genes are 3'participants in leukemia fusions generated by chromosomal translocations responsible of hematopoietic dysregulation. We tried to identify structural and functional promoter elements of MTG16 and MTGR1 genes in order to find associations between their regulation and hematopoiesis.
5' deletion examinations and luciferase reporter gene studies indicated that a 492 bp sequence upstream of the transcription start site is essential for transcriptional activity by the MTG16 promoter. The TATA- and CCAAT-less promoter with a GC box close to the start site showed strong reporter activity when examined in erythroid/megakaryocytic cells. Mutation of an evolutionary conserved GATA -301 consensus binding site repressed promoter function. Furthermore, results from in vitro antibody-enhanced electrophoretic mobility shift assay and in vivo chromatin immunoprecipitation indicated binding of GATA-1 to the GATA -301 site. A role of GATA-1 was also supported by transfection of small interfering RNA, which diminished MTG16 expression. Furthermore, expression of the transcription factor HERP2, which represses GATA-1, produced strong inhibition of the MTG16 promoter reporter consistent with a role of GATA-1 in transcriptional activation. The TATA-less and CCAAT-less MTGR1 promoter retained most of the transcriptional activity within a -308 to -207 bp region with a GC-box-rich sequence containing multiple SP1 binding sites reminiscent of a housekeeping gene with constitutive expression. However, mutations of individual SP1 binding sites did not repress promoter function; multiple active SP1 binding sites may be required to safeguard constitutive MTGR1 transcriptional activity. The observed repression of MTG16/MTGR1 promoters by the leukemia associated AML1-ETO fusion gene may have a role in hematopoietic dysfunction of leukemia.
An evolutionary conserved GATA binding site is critical in transcriptional regulation of the MTG16 promoter. In contrast, the MTGR1 gene depends on a GC-box-rich sequence for transcriptional regulation and possible ubiquitous expression. Our results demonstrate that the ETO homologue promoters are regulated differently consistent with hematopoietic cell-type- specific expression and function.
The MTG (Myeloid Translocation Gene) proteins are a family of novel transcriptional corepressors. We report that MTG16a, a protein isoform encoded by the MTG16 gene deranged by the t (16; 21) in myeloid malignancies, is targeted to the nucleolus. The amino acid sequence necessary for nucleolar localization was mapped to the MTG16a N-terminal region. MTG16a, like MTG8, the nuclear corepressor deranged by the t (8; 21), is capable to interact with specific histone deacetylases (HDACs) suggesting that the protein may mediate silencing of nucleolar gene transcription. In addition, MTG16a is capable to form oligomers with other MTG proteins. As a consequence of the t (16; 21) the AML1 DNA-binding domain replaces the MTG16a N-terminal region. The AML1-MTG16 fusion protein is targeted to the nucleoplasm where it is capable to oligomerize with MTG16a and interact with HDAC1 and HDAC3. The deficiency of HDAC-containing complexes at nucleolar sites and the accumulation of HDAC-containing complexes at AML1-sites may be critical in the pathogenesis of t (16; 21) myeloid malignancies.
The AML1-CBFbeta transcription factor complex is essential for the definitive hematopoiesis of all lineages and is the most frequent target of chromosomal rearrangements in human leukemia. In the t(8;21) translocation associated with acute myeloid leukemia (AML), the AML1(CBFA2/PEBP2alphaB) gene is juxtaposed to the MTG8(ETO/CDR) gene. We show here that the resultant AML1-MTG8 gene product specifically and strongly interacts with an 85-kDa phosphoprotein. Molecular cloning of cDNA indicated that the AML1-MTG8-binding protein (MTGR1) is highly related to MTG8 and similar to Drosophila Nervy. Comparison of amino acid sequences among MTGR1, MTG8, and Nervy revealed four evolutionarily conserved regions (NHR1 to NHR4). Ectopic expression of AML1-MTG8 in L-G murine myeloid progenitor cells inhibits differentiation to mature neutrophils and induces cell proliferation in response to granulocyte colony-stimulating factor (G-CSF). Analysis with C-terminal deletion mutants of AML1-MTG8 indicated that the region of 51 residues (488 to 538), which contains NHR2, is essential for the induction of G-CSF-dependent cell proliferation. Immunoprecipitation analysis indicates that this region is required for AML1-MTG8 to form a stable complex with MTGR1. Overexpression of MTGR1 stimulates AML1-MTG8 to induce G-CSF-dependent proliferation of L-G cells and to interfere with AML1-dependent transcription. These results suggest that AML1-MTG8 could function as a complex with MTGR1 and that the complex might be important in promoting leukemogenesis.
OPLS discriminant analysis (OPLS-DA) was successfully applied for the selection of a limited number of gene transcripts necessary to discriminate PTPN11 and RAS mutated cells in acute lymphoblastic leukaemia (ALL) patients. The original set of 273 variables with VIP (1) values higher than 2.0 in the OPLS-DA model could be further reduced to 200 by elimination of less informative variables in the PCA class models adopted for SIMCA classification. The above 200 transcripts not only achieve a satisfactory discrimination accuracy between PTPN11 and RAS mutated cells but also indicate clearly that wild type samples belong to none of the mutated class models. In this list it was possible to identify candidate genes that could be involved in the molecular mechanisms discriminating PTPN11 and RAS mutations in ALL. Among them CBFA2T2, a member of the "ETO" family, is known because of its homology and association with the product of RUNX1-CBFA2T1 gene fusion generated by t(8;21) translocation, one frequent cause of acute myeloid leukemia.
Two members of the MTG/ETO family of transcriptional corepressors, MTG8 and MTG16, are disrupted by chromosomal translocations in up to 15% of acute myeloid leukemia cases. The third family member, MTGR1, was identified as a factor that associates with the t(8;21) fusion protein RUNX1-MTG8. We demonstrate that Mtgr1 associates with mSin3A, N-CoR, and histone deacetylase 3 and that when tethered to DNA, Mtgr1 represses transcription, suggesting that Mtgr1 also acts as a transcriptional corepressor. To define the biological function of Mtgr1, we created Mtgr1-null mice. These mice are proportionally smaller than their littermates during embryogenesis and throughout their life span but otherwise develop normally. However, these mice display a progressive reduction in the secretory epithelial cell lineage in the small intestine. This is not due to the loss of small intestinal progenitor cells expressing Gfi1, which is required for the formation of goblet and Paneth cells, implying that loss of Mtgr1 impairs the maturation of secretory cells in the small intestine.
The Eight-Twenty-One (ETO) nuclear co-repressor gene belongs to the ETO homologue family also containing Myeloid Translocation Gene on chromosome 16 (MTG16) and myeloid translocation Gene-Related protein 1 (MTGR1). By chromosomal translocations ETO and MTG16 become parts of fusion proteins characteristic of morphological variants of acute myeloid leukemia. Normal functions of ETO homologues have as yet not been examined. The goal of this work was to identify structural and functional promoter elements upstream of the coding sequence of the ETO gene in order to explore lineage-specific hematopoietic expression and get hints to function.
A putative proximal ETO promoter was identified within 411 bp upstream of the transcription start site. Strong ETO promoter activity was specifically observed upon transfection of a promoter reporter construct into erythroid/megakaryocytic cells, which have endogeneous ETO gene activity. An evolutionary conserved region of 228 bp revealed potential cis-elements involved in transcription of ETO. Disruption of the evolutionary conserved GATA -636 consensus binding site repressed transactivation and disruption of the ETS1 -705 consensus binding site enhanced activity of the ETO promoter. The promoter was stimulated by overexpression of GATA-1 into erythroid/megakaryocytic cells. Electrophoretic mobility shift assay with erythroid/megakaryocytic cells showed specific binding of GATA-1 to the GATA -636 site. Furthermore, results from chromatin immunoprecipitation showed GATA-1 binding in vivo to the conserved region of the ETO promoter containing the -636 site. The results suggest that the GATA -636 site may have a role in activation of the ETO gene activity in cells with erythroid/megakaryocytic potential. Leukemia associated AML1-ETO strongly suppressed an ETO promoter reporter in erythroid/megakaryocytic cells.
We demonstrate that the GATA-1 transcription factor binds and transactivates the ETO proximal promoter in an erythroid/megakaryocytic-specific manner. Thus, trans-acting factors that are essential in erythroid/megakaryocytic differentiation govern ETO expression.
AML1/ETO is the chimeric protein resulting from the t(8;21) in acute myeloid leukemia. The Nervy homology 2 (NHR2) domain in ETO mediates oligomerization and AML1/ETO's interactions with ETO, MTGR1, and MTG16, and with the corepressor molecules mSin3A and HDAC1 and HDAC3. We solved the NHR2 domain structure and found it to be an alpha-helical tetramer. We show that oligomerization contributes to AML1/ETO's inhibition of granulocyte differentiation, is essential for its ability to enhance the clonogenic potential of primary mouse bone marrow cells, and affects AML1/ETO's activity on several endogenous genes. Oligomerization is also required for AML1/ETO's interactions with ETO, MTGR1, and MTG16, but not with other corepressor molecules.
The AML1-MTG8 fusion transcription factor generated by t(8;21) translocation is thought to dysregulate genes that are crucial for normal differentiation and proliferation of hematopoietic progenitors to cause acute myelogenous leukemia (AML). Although AML1-MTG8 has been shown to repress the transcription of AML1 targets, none of the known targets of AML1 are probably responsible for AML1-MTG8-mediated leukemogenesis. In this study, 24 genes under the downstream control of AML1-MTG8 were isolated by using a differential display technique. Analysis with deletion mutants of AML1-MTG8 demonstrated that the regulation of the majority of these genes requires the region of 51 residues (488-538) containing the Nervy homology region 2 (NHR2), through which AML1-MTG8 interacts with MTGR1. Among the 24 genes identified, 10 were considered to be genes under the control of AML1, because their expression was altered by AML1b or AML1a or both. However, the other 14 genes were not affected by either AML1b or AML1a, suggesting the possibility that AML1-MTG8 regulates a number of specific target genes that are not normally regulated by AML1. Furthermore, an up-regulated gene, TIS11b (ERF-1, cMG1), was highly expressed in t(8;21) leukemic cells, and the overexpression of TIS11b induced myeloid cell proliferation in response to granulocyte colony-stimulating factor. These results suggest that the high-level expression of TIS11b contributes to AML1-MTG8-mediated leukemogenesis. (Blood. 2000;96:655-663)
The t(16;21)(q24;q22) translocation is a rare but recurrent chromosomal abnormality associated with therapy-related myeloid malignancies and a variant of the t(8;21) translocation in which the AML1 gene on chromosome 21 is rearranged. Here we report the molecular definition of this chromosomal aberration in four patients. We cloned cDNAs from the leukemic cells of a patient carrying t(16;21) by the reverse transcription polymerase chain reaction using an AML1-specific primer. The structural analysis of the cDNAs showed that AML1 was fused to a novel gene named MTG16 (Myeloid Translocation Gene on chromosome 16) which shows high homology to MTG8 (ETO/CDR) and MTGR1. Northern blot analysis using MTG16 probes mainly detected 4.5 kb and 4.2 kb RNAs, along with several other minor RNAs in various human tissues. As in t(8;21), the t(16;21) breakpoints occurred between the exons 5 and 6 of AML1, and between the exons 1 and 2 or the exons 3 and 4 of MTG16. The two genes are fused in-frame, resulting in the characteristic chimeric transcripts of this translocation. Although the reciprocal chimeric product, MTG16-AML1, was also detected in one of the t(16;21) patients, its protein product was predicted to be truncated. Thus, the AML1-MTG16 gene fusion in t(16;21) leukemia results in the production of a protein that is very similar to the AML1-MTG8 chimeric protein.
Th-inducing Pox virus and zinc finger/Krüppel-like factor (ThPOK) is a key commitment factor for CD4(+) lineage T cells and is essential for the maintenance of CD4 lineage integrity; thus, the expression of ThPOK has to be tightly controlled. In this article, we demonstrate that Myc-associated zinc finger-related factor (MAZR) and Runt-related transcription factor 1 (Runx1) together repressed ThPOK in preselection double-positive thymocytes, whereas MAZR acted in synergy with Runx3 in the repression of ThPOK in CD8(+) T cells. Furthermore, MAZR-Runx1 and MAZR-Runx3 double-mutant mice showed enhanced derepression of Cd4 in double-negative thymocytes and in CD8(+) T cells in comparison with Runx1 or Runx3 single-deficient mice, respectively, indicating that MAZR modulates Cd4 silencing. Thus, our data demonstrate developmental stage-specific synergistic activities between MAZR and Runx/core-binding factor β (CBFβ) complexes. Finally, retroviral Cre-mediated conditional deletion of MAZR in peripheral CD8(+) T cells led to the derepression of ThPOK, thus showing that MAZR is also part of the molecular machinery that maintains a repressed state of ThPOK in CD8(+) T cells.
Myeloid-derived suppressor cells (MDSCs) play a critical role in tumor-associated immunosuppression, thus affecting effective immunotherapies for cancers. However, the molecular mechanisms involved in regulating the differentiation and function of MDSCs remain largely unclear. In this study, we found that inhibition of microRNA (miR)-9 promoted the differentiation of MDSCs with significantly reduced immunosuppressive function whereas overexpression of miR-9 markedly enhanced the function of MDSCs. Notably, knockdown of miR-9 significantly impaired the activity of MDSCs and inhibited the tumor growth of Lewis lung carcinoma in mice. Moreover, miR-9 regulated MDSCs differentiation by targeting the runt-related transcription factor 1, an essential transcription factor in regulating MDSC differentiation and function. Furthermore, the CREB was found to regulate miR-9 expression in MDSCs. Taken together, our findings have identified a critical role of miR-9 in regulating the differentiation and function of MDSCs.
Mucosa-associated lymphoid tissue (MALT) is a group of secondary and organized lymphoid tissue that develops at different mucosal surfaces. Peyer's patches (PPs), nasopharynx-associated lymphoid tissue (NALT), and tear duct-associated lymphoid tissue (TALT) are representative MALT in the small intestine, nasal cavity, and lacrimal sac, respectively. A recent study has shown that transcriptional regulators of core binding factor (Cbf) β2 and promotor-1-transcribed Runt-related transcription factor 1 (P1-Runx1) are required for the differentiation of CD3-CD4+CD45+ lymphoid tissue inducer (LTi) cells, which initiate and trigger the developmental program of PPs, but the involvement of this pathway in NALT and TALT development remains to be elucidated. Here we report that Cbfβ2 plays an essential role in NALT and TALT development by regulating LTi cell trafficking to the NALT and TALT anlagens. Cbfβ2 was expressed in LTi cells in all three types of MALT examined. Indeed, similar to the previous finding for PPs, we found that Cbfβ2-/- mice lacked NALT and TALT lymphoid structures. However, in contrast to PPs, NALT and TALT developed normally in the absence of P1-Runx1 or other Runx family members such as Runx2 and Runx3. LTi cells for NALT and TALT differentiated normally but did not accumulate in the respective lymphoid tissue anlagens in Cbfβ2-/- mice. These findings demonstrate that Cbfβ2 is a central regulator of the MALT developmental program, but the dependency of Runx proteins on the lymphoid tissue development would differ among PPs, NALT, and TALT.
Tongue squamous cell carcinoma (TSCC) is a rare and aggressive type of cancer, which is associated with a poor prognosis. Identification of patients at high risk of TSCC tumorigenesis may provide information for the early detection of metastases, and for potential treatment strategies. MicroRNA (miRNA; miR) and mRNA expression profiling of TSCC tissue samples and normal control tissue samples were obtained from three Gene Expression Omnibus (GEO) data series. Bioinformatics analyses, including the Gene Ontology (GO) and Kyoto Encyclopedia of Genes and Genomes were used to identify genes and pathways specifically associated with miRNA-associated TSCC oncology. A total of 25 miRNAs and 769 mRNAs were differentially expressed in the two groups assessed, and all the differentially expressed miRNA and mRNA target interactions were analyzed. The miRNA target genes were predominantly associated with 38 GO terms and 13 pathways. Of the genes differentially expressed between the two groups, and confirmed in another GEO series, miRNA-494, miRNA-96, miRNA-183, runt-related transcription factor 1, programmed cell death protein 4 and membrane-associated guanylate kinase were the most significantly altered, and may be central in the regulation of TSCC. Bioinformatics may be used to analyze large quantities of data in microarrays through rigorous experimental planning, statistical analysis and the collection of complete data on TSCC. In the present study, a novel differential miRNA-mRNA expression network was constructed, and further investigation may provide novel targets for the diagnosis of TSCC.
Studies in humans and animal models provide compelling evidence for age-related skeletal muscle denervation, which may contribute to muscle fiber atrophy and loss. Skeletal muscle denervation seems relentless; however, long-term, high-intensity physical activity appears to promote muscle reinnervation. Whether 5-month resistance training (RT) enhances skeletal muscle innervation in obese older adults is unknown. This study found that neural cell-adhesion molecule, NCAM+ muscle area decreased with RT and was inversely correlated with muscle strength. NCAM1 and RUNX1 gene transcripts significantly decreased with the intervention. Type I and type II fiber grouping in the vastus lateralis did not change significantly but increases in leg press and knee extensor strength inversely correlated with type I, but not with type II, fiber grouping. RT did not modify the total number of satellite cells, their number per area, or the number associated with specific fiber subtypes or innervated/denervated fibers. Our results suggest that RT has a beneficial impact on skeletal innervation, even when started late in life by sedentary obese older adults.
TEL-AML1 (ETV6-RUNX1) fusion gene which is formed prenatally in 1% of the newborns, is a common genetic abnormality in childhood Bcell precursor acute lymphoblastic leukemia. But only one child out of a hundred children born with this fusion gene develops leukemia (bottleneck phenomenon) later in its life, if contracts the second mutation. In other words, out of a hundred children born with TEL-AML1 only one child is at risk for leukemia development, which means that TEL-AML1 fusion gene is not sufficient for overt leukemia. There is a stringent requirement for a second genetic abnormality for leukemia development and this is the real or the ultimate cause of the leukemia bottleneck phenomenon. In most cases of TEL-AML1+ leukemia, the translocation t(12;21) is complemented with the loss of the normal TEL gene, not involved in the translocation, on the contralateral 12p. The loss of the normal TEL gene, i.e. loss of heterozygosity at 12p, occurs postnatally during the mitotic proliferation of TEL-AML1+ cell in the mitotic crossing over process. Mitotic crossing over is a very rare event with a frequency rate of 10-6 in a 10 kb region. The exploration and identification of the environmental exposure(s) that cause(s) proliferation of the TELAML1+ cell in which approximately 106 mitoses are generated to cause 12p loss of heterozygosity, i.e. TEL gene deletion, may contribute to the introduction of preventive measures for leukemia.
The generation of diverse neuronal subtypes involves specification of neural progenitors and, subsequently, postmitotic neuronal differentiation, a relatively poorly understood process. Here, we describe a mechanism whereby the neurotrophic factor NGF and the transcription factor Runx1 coordinate postmitotic differentiation of nonpeptidergic nociceptors, a major nociceptor subtype. We show that the integrity of a Runx1/CBFβ holocomplex is crucial for NGF-dependent nonpeptidergic nociceptor maturation. NGF signals through the ERK/MAPK pathway to promote expression of Cbfb but not Runx1 prior to maturation of nonpeptidergic nociceptors. In contrast, transcriptional initiation of Runx1 in nonpeptidergic nociceptor precursors is dependent on the homeodomain transcription factor Islet1, which is largely dispensable for Cbfb expression. Thus, an NGF/TrkA-MAPK-CBFβ pathway converges with Islet1-Runx1 signaling to promote Runx1/CBFβ holocomplex formation and nonpeptidergic nociceptor maturation. Convergence of extrinsic and intrinsic signals to control heterodimeric transcription factor complex formation provides a robust mechanism for postmitotic neuronal subtype specification.
Microglia are CNS resident macrophages, and they play important roles in neural development and function. Recent studies have suggested that murine microglia arise from a single source, the yolk sac (YS), yet these studies lack spatial resolution to define the bona fide source(s) for microglia. Here, using light-induced high temporal-spatial resolution fate mapping, we challenge this single-source view by showing that microglia in zebrafish arise from multiple sources. The embryonic/larval microglia originate from the rostral blood island (RBI) region, the equivalent of mouse YS for myelopoiesis, whereas the adult microglia arise from the ventral wall of dorsal aorta (VDA) region, a tissue also producing definitive hematopoiesis in mouse. We further show that the VDA-region-derived microglia are Runx1 dependent, but cMyb independent, and developmentally regulated differently from the RBI region-derived microglia. Our study establishes a new paradigm for investigating the development and function of distinct microglia populations.
Using a novel retroviral shuttle vector approach we identified genes that collaborate with a patient derived RUNX1 (AML1) mutant. RUNX1 mutations occurs in 40% of myelodysplastic syndromes (MDS). MDS are a group of hematopoietic stem cell disorders that are characterized by dysplasia that often progress to acute myeloid leukemia (AML). Our goal was to identify genes dysregulated by vector-mediated genotoxicity that may collaborate with the RUNX1 mutant (D171N). D171N expressing cells have a survival and engraftment disadvantage and require additional genetic lesions to survive and persist. By dysregulating genes near the integrated vector provirus, the shuttle vector can promote transformation of D171N cells and tag the nearby genes that collaborate with D171N. In our approach, a gammaretroviral shuttle vector that expresses D171N is used to transduce CD105+, Sca-1+ mouse bone marrow. Mutagenized cells are expanded in liquid culture and vector integration sites from surviving cells are then identified using a retroviral shuttle vector approach. We repeatedly recovered integrated vector proviruses near genes (Itpkb, Ccdc12, and Nbeal2). To assess the prognostic significance of the genes identified we examined differential expression, overall survival, and relapse free survival of AML patients with alteration in the genes identified using The Cancer Genome Atlas (TCGA) AML data set. We found that ITPKB functions as an independent factor for poor prognoses and RUNX1 mutations in conjunction with ITPKB, CCDC12, and NBEAL2 have prognostic potential in AML.
The mutational profiles of acute myeloid leukemia (AML) with partial tandem duplication of mixed-lineage leukemia gene (MLL-PTD) have not been comprehensively studied. We studied 19 gene mutations for 98 patients with MLL-PTD AML to determine the mutation frequency and clinical correlations. MLL-PTD was screened by reverse-transcriptase PCR and confirmed by real-time quantitative PCR. The mutational analyses were performed with PCR-based assays followed by direct sequencing. Gene mutations of signaling pathways occurred in 63.3% of patients, with FLT3-ITD (44.9%) and FLT3-TKD (13.3%) being the most frequent. 66% of patients had gene mutations involving epigenetic regulation, and DNMT3A (32.7%), IDH2 (18.4%), TET2 (18.4%), and IDH1 (10.2%) mutations were most common. Genes of transcription pathways and tumor suppressors accounted for 23.5% and 10.2% of patients. RUNX1 mutation occurred in 23.5% of patients, while none had NPM1 or double CEBPA mutation. 90.8% of MLL-PTD AML patients had at least one additional gene mutation. Of 55 MLL-PTD AML patients who received standard chemotherapy, age older than 50 years and DNMT3A mutation were associated with inferior outcome. In conclusion, gene mutations involving DNA methylation and activated signaling pathway were common co-existed gene mutations. DNMT3A mutation was a poor prognostic factor in MLL-PTD AML.
Little is known about the susceptibility to acute myeloid leukemia. We aim to search non-protein coding regions of key hematopoiesis transcription factors for genetic variations associated with acute myeloid leukemia susceptibility. We genotyped SNPs of RUNX1 P1 promoter, P2 promoter, +23 enhancer, intron 5.2 enhancer, PU.1 promoter, CEBPA promoter, and CEBPE promoter from acute myeloid leukemia patients and healthy controls. Rs2249650 and rs2268276 at RUNX1 intron 5.2 enhancer were found to be associated with acute myeloid leukemia susceptibility. Artificial reporters containing different rs2249650 and rs2268276 alleles showed differential activities in K562 cell line, a human immortalized myeloid leukemia line. Rs2249650 contributes to reporter activities more than rs2268276. Gel shift assay is consistent with the luciferase assay. Supershift assay indicated that one potential binding protein was PU.1. To sum up, rs2268276 and especially rs2249650 may be qualified as new acute myeloid leukemia susceptibility associated SNPs.
Hematopoietic stem and progenitor cells (HSPCs) are born from hemogenic endothelium in the dorsal aorta. Specification of this hematopoietic niche is regulated by a signaling axis using Hedgehog (Hh) and Notch, which culminates in expression of Runx1 in the ventral wall of the artery. Here, we demonstrate that the vitamin D precursor cholecalciferol (D3) modulates HSPC production by impairing hemogenic vascular niche formation. Accumulation of D3 through exogenous treatment or inhibition of Cyp2r1, the enzyme required for D3 25-hydroxylation, results in Hh pathway antagonism marked by loss of Gli-reporter activation, defects in vascular niche identity, and reduced HSPCs. Mechanistic studies indicated the effect was specific to D3, and not active 1,25-dihydroxy vitamin D3, acting on the extracellular sterol-binding domain of Smoothened. These findings highlight a direct impact of inefficient vitamin D synthesis on cell fate commitment and maturation in Hh-regulated tissues, which may have implications beyond hemogenic endothelium specification.
Cystatin D is an inhibitor of lysosomal and secreted cysteine proteases. Strikingly, cystatin D has been found to inhibit proliferation, migration and invasion of colon carcinoma cells indicating tumor suppressor activity that is unrelated to protease inhibition. Here, we demonstrate that a proportion of cystatin D locates within the cell nucleus at specific transcriptionally active chromatin sites. Consistently, transcriptomic analysis show that cystatin D alters gene expression, including that of genes encoding transcription factors such as RUNX1, RUNX2, and MEF2C in HCT116 cells. In concordance with transcriptomic data, quantitative proteomic analysis identified 292 proteins differentially expressed in cystatin D-expressing cells involved in cell adhesion, cytoskeleton, and RNA synthesis and processing. Furthermore, using cytokine arrays we found that cystatin D reduces the secretion of several protumor cytokines such as fibroblast growth factor (FGF)-4, CX3CL1/fractalkine, neurotrophin (NTF)4/NT-4, oncostatin (OSM)-M, pulmonary and activation-regulated chemokine (PARC)/CCL18 and transforming growth factor (TGF)B3/TGF-b3. These results support an unanticipated role of cystatin D in the cell nucleus, controlling the transcription of specific genes involved in crucial cellular functions, which may mediate its protective action in colon cancer.
It's generally assumed that gain- and loss-of-function manipulations of a functionally important gene should lead to the opposite phenotypes. Surprisingly, here we show that both overexpression and knockout of miR-126 result in enhanced leukemogenesis in cooperation with t(8;21) fusion genes, AML1-ETO/RUNX1-RUNX1T1 or AML1-ETO9a (a potent oncogenic isoform of AML1-ETO). In accordance with our observation that increased expression of miR-126 is associated with unfavorable survival in patients with t(8;21) acute myeloid leukemia (AML), we show that miR-126 overexpression exhibits a stronger effect on long-term survival and progression of AML1-ETO9a-mediated leukemia stem/initiating cells (LSCs/LICs) in mice than does miR-126 knockout. Furthermore, miR-126 knockout substantially enhances responsiveness of leukemia cells to standard chemotherapy. Mechanistically, miR-126 overexpression activates genes that are highly expressed in LSCs/LICs and/or primitive hematopoietic stem/progenitor cells likely through targeting ERRFI1 and SPRED1, whereas miR-126 knockout activates genes that are highly expressed in committed, more differentiated hematopoietic progenitor cells presumably through inducing FZD7 expression. Our data demonstrate that miR-126 plays a critical but two-faceted role in leukemia, and thereby uncover a new layer of miRNA regulation in cancer. Moreover, as miR-126 depletion can sensitize AML cells to standard chemotherapy, our data also suggest that miR-126 represents a promising therapeutic target.
The Runx1 transcription factor cooperates with or antagonizes other transcription factors and plays essential roles in the differentiation and function of T lymphocytes. Previous works showed that Runx1 is expressed in peripheral CD4(+) T cells which level declines after T cell receptor (TCR) activation, and artificial deletion of Runx1 causes autoimmune lung disease in mice. The present study addresses the mechanisms by which Runx1 contributes to the maintenance of peripheral CD4(+) T cell quiescence. Microarray and quantitative RT-PCR analyses were employed to compare the transcriptome of Runx1 -/- CD4(+) T cells to those of unstimulated and TCR-stimulated Runx1 +/- cells. The results identified genes whose expression was modulated similarly by Runx1 deletion and TCR activation. Among them, genes encoding cytokines, chemokines, and Jak/STAT signaling molecules were substantially induced. In Runx1-deleted T cells, simultaneous increases in Il-17A and Rorγc, a known master gene in TH17 differentiation, were observed. In addition, we observed that the loss of Runx1 reduced the transcription of genes encoding quiescence-associated transcription factors, including Foxp1, Foxo1, and Klf2. Interestingly, we identified consensus Runx1 binding sites at the promoter regions of Foxp1, Foxo1, and Klf2 genes, which can be enriched by chromatin immunoprecipitation assay with an anti-Runx1 antibody. Therefore, we suggest that Runx1 may activate, directly or indirectly, the expression of quiescence-associated molecules and thereby contribute to the maintenance of quiescence in CD4(+) T cells.
In the present study, we analyzed microRNA (miRNA) and gene expression profiles using 499 papillary thyroid carcinoma (PTC) samples and 58 normal thyroid tissues obtained from The Cancer Genome Atlas database. A pivotal regulatory network of 18 miRNA and 16 targets was identified. Upregulated miRNAs (miR-222, miR-221, miR-146b, miR-181a/b/d, miR-34a, and miR-424) and downregulated miRNAs (miR-9-1, miR-138, miR-363, miR-20b, miR-195, and miR-152) were identified. Among them, the upregulation of miR-424 and downregulation of miR-363, miR-195, and miR-152 were not previously identified. The genes CCNE2 (also known as cyclin E2), E2F1, RARA, CCND1 (cyclin D1), RUNX1, ITGA2, MET, CDKN1A (p21), and COL4A1 were overexpressed, and AXIN2, TRAF6, BCL2, RARB, HSP90B1, FGF7, and PDGFRA were downregulated. Among them, CCNE2, COL4A1, TRAF6, and HSP90B1 were newly identified. Based on receiver operating characteristic curves, several miRNAs (miR-222, miR-221, and miR-34a) and genes (CCND1 and MET) were ideal diagnostic indicators, with sensitivities and specificities greater than 90%. The combination of inversely expressed miRNAs and targets improved diagnostic accuracy. In a clinical feature analysis, several miRNAs (miR-34a, miR-424, miR-20b, and miR-152) and genes (CCNE2, COL4A1, TRAF6, and HSP90B1) were associated with aggressive clinical features, which have not previously been reported. Our study not only identified a pivotal miRNA regulatory network associated with PTC but also provided evidence that miRNAs and target genes can be used as biomarkers in PTC diagnosis and clinical risk evaluation.
Chromosomal translocations are frequently associated with a wide variety of cancers, particularly hematologic malignancies. A recurrent chromosomal abnormality in acute myeloid leukemia is the reciprocal translocation t(8;21) that fuses RUNX1 and ETO genes. We report here that Wnt/β-catenin signaling increases the expression of ETO and RUNX1 genes in human hematopoietic progenitors. We found that β-catenin is rapidly recruited into RNA polymerase II transcription factories (RNAPII-Ser5) and that ETO and RUNX1 genes are brought into close spatial proximity upon Wnt3a induction. Notably, long-term treatment of cells with Wnt3a induces the generation a frequent RUNX1-ETO translocation event. Thus, Wnt/β-catenin signaling induces transcription and translocation of RUNX1 and ETO fusion gene partners, opening a novel window to understand the onset/development of leukemia.
The ETV6/RUNX1 gene fusion defines the largest genetic subgroup of childhood ALL with overall rapid treatment response. However, up to 15% of cases relapse. Because an impaired glucocorticoid pathway is implicated in disease recurrence we studied the impact of genetic alterations by SNP array analysis in 31 relapsed cases. In 58% of samples, we found deletions in various glucocorticoid signaling pathway-associated genes, but only NR3C1 and ETV6 deletions prevailed in minimal residual disease poor responding and subsequently relapsing cases (p < 0.05). To prove the necessity of a functional glucocorticoid receptor, we reconstituted wild-type NR3C1 expression in mutant, glucocorticoid-resistant REH cells and studied the glucocorticoid response in vitro and in a xenograft mouse model. While these results prove that glucocorticoid receptor defects are crucial for glucocorticoid resistance in an experimental setting, they do not address the essential clinical situation where glucocorticoid resistance at relapse is rather part of a global drug resistance.
The t(8;21) translocation is the most widespread genetic defect found in human acute myeloid leukemia. This translocation results in the RUNX1-RUNX1T1 fusion gene that produces a wide variety of alternative transcripts and influences the course of the disease. The rules of combinatorics and splicing of exons in the RUNX1-RUNX1T1 transcripts are not known. To address this issue, we developed an exon graph model of the fusion gene organization and evaluated its local exon combinatorics by the exon combinatorial index (ECI). Here we show that the local exon combinatorics of the RUNX1-RUNX1T1 gene follows a power-law behavior and (i) the vast majority of exons has a low ECI, (ii) only a small part is represented by "exons-hubs" of splicing with very high ECI values, and (iii) it is scale-free and very sensitive to targeted skipping of "exons-hubs". Stochasticity of the splicing machinery and preferred usage of exons in alternative splicing can explain such behavior of the system. Stochasticity may explain up to 12% of the ECI variance and results in a number of non-coding and unproductive transcripts that can be considered as a noise. Half-life of these transcripts is increased due to the deregulation of some key genes of the nonsense-mediated decay system in leukemia cells. On the other hand, preferred usage of exons may explain up to 75% of the ECI variability. Our analysis revealed a set of splicing-related cis-regulatory motifs that can explain "attractiveness" of exons in alternative splicing but only when they are considered together. Cis-regulatory motifs are guides for splicing trans-factors and we observed a leukemia-specific profile of expression of the splicing genes in t(8;21)-positive blasts. Altogether, our results show that alternative splicing of the RUNX1-RUNX1T1 transcripts follows strict rules and that the power-law component of the fusion gene organization confers a high flexibility to this process.
Chronic myeloid leukemia (CML) has been the first human malignancy to be associated, more than 50 years ago, with a consistent chromosomal abnormality-the t(9;22)(q34;q11) chromosomal translocation. The resulting BCR-ABL1 fusion gene, encoding a tyrosine kinase with deregulated activity, has a central role in the pathogenesis of CML. Ancestral or additional genetic events necessary for CML to develop have long been hypothesized but never really demonstrated. CML can successfully be treated with tyrosine kinase inhibitors (TKIs). Mutations in the BCR-ABL1 kinase domain might arise, however, that confer resistance to 1 or more of the currently available TKIs. Hence, the critical role of BCR-ABL1 mutation screening for optimal therapeutic management, with the current gold standard technique, conventional sequencing, likely to be replaced soon by ultra-deep sequencing. Mutations in genes other than BCR-ABL1 include ASXL1, TET2, RUNX1, DNMT3A, EZH2, and TP53 in chronic phase patients and RUNX1, ASXL1, IKZF1, WT1, TET2, NPM1, IDH1, IDH2, NRAS, KRAS, CBL, TP53, CDKN2A, RB1, and GATA-2 mutations in advanced phase patients. The latter also display additional cytogenetic abnormalities, including submicroscopic regions of gain or loss that only single nucleotide polymorphism arrays or array comparative genomic hybridization can detect. Whether whole genome/exome sequencing studies will uncover novel mutations relevant for pathogenesis, progression, and risk-adapted therapy is still unclear.
Following myonecrosis, muscle satellite cells proliferate, differentiate and fuse, creating new myofibers. The Runx1 transcription factor is not expressed in naïve developing muscle or in adult muscle tissue. However, it is highly expressed in muscles exposed to myopathic damage yet, the role of Runx1 in muscle regeneration is completely unknown. Our study of Runx1 function in the muscle's response to myonecrosis reveals that this transcription factor is activated and cooperates with the MyoD and AP-1/c-Jun transcription factors to drive the transcription program of muscle regeneration. Mice lacking dystrophin and muscle Runx1 (mdx-/Runx1f/f), exhibit impaired muscle regeneration leading to age-dependent muscle waste, gradual decrease in motor capabilities and a shortened lifespan. Runx1-deficient primary myoblasts are arrested at cell cycle G1 and consequently differentiate. Such premature differentiation disrupts the myoblasts' normal proliferation/differentiation balance, reduces the number and size of regenerating myofibers and impairs muscle regeneration. Our combined Runx1-dependent gene expression, ChIP-seq, ATAC-seq and histone H3K4me1/H3K27ac modification analyses revealed a subset of Runx1-regulated genes that are co-occupied by MyoD and c-Jun in mdx-/Runx1f/f muscle. The data provide unique insights into the transcriptional program driving muscle regeneration and implicate Runx1 as an important participant in the pathology of muscle wasting diseases.
The gene and protein expression profiles in myeloproliferative neoplasms (MPNs) may reveal gene and protein markers of a potential clinical relevance in diagnosis, treatment and prediction of response to therapy. Using cDNA microarray analysis of 25,100 unique genes, we studied the gene expression profile of CD34+ cells and granulocytes obtained from peripheral blood of subjects with essential thrombocythemia (ET), polycythemia vera (PV) and primary myelofibrosis (PMF). The microarray analyses of the CD34+ cells and granulocytes were performed from 20 de novo MPN subjects: JAK2 positive ET, PV, PMF subjects, and JAK2 negative ET/PMF subjects. The granulocytes for proteomic studies were pooled in 4 groups: PV with JAK2 mutant allele burden above 80%, ET with JAK2 mutation, PMF with JAK2 mutation and ET/PMF with no JAK2 mutation. The number of differentially regulated genes was about two fold larger in CD34+ cells compared to granulocytes. Thirty-six genes (including RUNX1, TNFRSF19) were persistently highly expressed, while 42 genes (including FOXD4, PDE4A) were underexpressed both in CD34+ cells and granulocytes. Using proteomic studies, significant up-regulation was observed for MAPK and PI3K/AKT signaling regulators that control myeloid cell apoptosis and proliferation: RAC2, MNDA, S100A8/9, CORO1A, and GNAI2. When the status of the mTOR signaling pathway related genes was analyzed, PI3K/AKT regulators were preferentially up-regulated in CD34+ cells of MPNs, with down-regulated major components of the protein complex EIF4F. Molecular profiling of CD34+ cells and granulocytes of MPN determined gene expression patterns beyond their recognized function in disease pathogenesis that included dominant up-regulation of PI3K/AKT signaling.
Differentiated CD4(+) T cells preserve plasticity under various conditions. However, the stability of Th1 cells is unclear, as is whether Th1 cells can convert into Th17 cells and thereby contribute to the generation of IFN-γ(+) IL-17(+) CD4(+) T cells, the number of which correlates with severity of colitis. We investigated whether IFN-γ(+) Th1 cells can convert into Th17 cells under intestinal inflammation and the mechanisms involved. IFN-γ(Thy1.1+) Th1 cells were generated by culturing naïve CD4(+) T cells from IFN-γ(Thy1.1) CBir1 TCR-Tg reporter mice, whose TCR is specific for an immunodominant microbiota antigen, CBir1 flagellin, under Th1 polarizing conditions. IFN-γ(Thy1.1+) Th1 cells induced colitis in Rag(-/-) mice after adoptive transfer and converted into IL-17(+) Th17, but not Foxp3(+) Treg cells in the inflamed intestines. TGF-β and IL-6, but not IL-1β and IL-23, regulated Th1 conversion into Th17 cells. TGF-β induction of transcriptional factor Runx1 is crucial for the conversion, since silencing Runx1 by siRNA inhibited Th1 conversion into Th17 cells. Furthermore, TGF-β enhanced histone H3K9 acetylation but inhibited H3K9 trimethylation of Runx1- and ROR-γt-binding sites on il-17 or rorc gene in Th1 cells. We conclude that Th1 cells convert into Th17 cells under inflammatory conditions in intestines, which is possibly mediated by TGF-β induction of Runx1.
Cooperative assemblies of transcription factors (TFs) on target gene enhancers coordinate cell proliferation, fate specification, and differentiation through precise and complicated transcriptional mechanisms. Chemical modifications, such as phosphorylation, of TFs induced by cell signaling further modulate the dynamic cooperativity of TFs. In this study, we found that various Ets1-containing TF-DNA complexes respond differently to calcium-induced phosphorylation of Ets1, which is known to inhibit Ets1-DNA binding. Crystallographic analysis of a complex comprising Ets1, Runx1, and CBFβ at the TCRα enhancer revealed that Ets1 acquires robust binding stability in the Runx1 and DNA-complexed state, via allosteric mechanisms. This allows phosphorylated Ets1 to be retained at the TCRα enhancer with Runx1, in contrast to other Ets1 target gene enhancers including mb-1 and stromelysin-1. This study provides a structure-based model for cell-signaling-dependent regulation of target genes, mediated via chemical modification of TFs.
Core-binding factor β (Cbfβ) is a subunit of the Cbf family of heterodimeric transcription factors, which plays a critical role in skeletal development through its interaction with the Cbfα subunits, also known as Runt-related transcription factors (Runxs). However, the mechanism by which Cbfβ regulates cartilage and bone development remains unclear. Existing Cbfβ-deficient mouse models cannot specify the role of Cbfβ in skeletal cell lineage. Herein, we sought to specifically address the role of Cbfβ in cartilage and bone development by using a conditional knockout (CKO) approach. A mesenchymal-specific Cbfβ CKO mouse model was generated by using the Dermo1-Cre mouse line to specifically delete Cbfβ in mesenchymal stem cells, which give rise to osteoblasts and chondrocytes. Surprisingly, the mutant mice had under-developed larynx and tracheal cartilage, causing alveolus defects that led to death shortly after birth from suffocation. Also, the mutant mice exhibited severe skeletal deformities from defective intramembranous and endochondral ossification, owing to delayed chondrocyte maturation and impaired osteoblast differentiation. Almost all bones of the mutant mice, including the calvariae, vertebrae, tibiae, femurs, ribs, limbs and sternums were defective. Importantly, we showed that Cbfβ was expressed throughout the skeleton during both embryonic and postnatal development, which explains the multiple-skeletal defects observed in the mutant mice. Consistently, Cbfβ deficiency impaired both chondrocyte proliferation and hypertrophy zone hypertrophy during growth-plate development in the long bones of mutant mice. Notably, Cbfβ, Runx1 and Runx2 displayed different expression patterns in the growth plates of the wild-type mice, indicating that Cbfβ/Runx1 complex and Cbfβ/Runx2 complex may regulate chondrocyte proliferation and hypertrophy, respectively, in a spatial and temporal manner. Cbfβ deletion in the mesenchymal progenitors affected bone development by dramatically down-regulating Collagen X (Col X) and Osterix (Osx) but had a dispensable effect on osteoclast development. Collectively, the results demonstrate that Cbfβ mediates cartilage and bone development by interacting with Runx1 and Runx2 to regulate the expressions of Col X and Osx for chondrocyte and osteoblast development. These findings not only reveal a critical role for Cbfβ in cartilage and bone development but also facilitate the design of novel therapeutic approaches for skeletal diseases.
It has been shown that rapamycin is able to significantly increase the expression of FoxP3 and suppress activity in induced Treg (iTreg) cells in vivo and in vitro. CD39 is a newly determined Treg marker that relates to cell suppression. Runx1, a regulator of FoxP3, controls the expression of adenosine deaminase (ADA) gene, which is found recently in the downstream of CD39 pathway in trophoblast cells. Whether rapamycin would influence CD39 pathway and regulate the expression of Runx1 remains to be determined. The addition of rapamycin to human CD4(+) naïve cells in the presence of IL-2, TGF-β promotes the expression of FoxP3. In this paper, we found that CD39 positively correlated with the FoxP3 expression in iTreg cells. Rapamycin induced iTreg cells showed a stronger CD39/Runx1 expression with the enhanced suppressive function. These data suggested that CD39 expression was involved in iTreg generation and the enhanced suppressive ability of rapamycin induced Treg was partly due to Runx1 pathway. We conclude that rapamycin favors CD39/Runx1 expression in human iTreg and provides a novel insight into the mechanisms of iTreg generation enhanced by rapamycin.
Runx1 and Cbfβ are critical for the establishment of definitive hematopoiesis and are implicated in leukemic transformation. Despite the absolute requirements for these factors in the development of hematopoietic stem cells and lymphocytes, their roles in the development of bone marrow progenitor subsets have not been defined. Here, we demonstrate that Cbfβ is essential for the development of Flt3(+) macrophage-dendritic cell (DC) progenitors in the bone marrow and all DC subsets in the periphery. Besides the loss of DC progenitors, pan-hematopoietic Cbfb-deficient mice also lack CD105(+) erythroid progenitors, leading to severe anemia at 3 to 4 months of age. Instead, Cbfb deficiency results in aberrant progenitor differentiation toward granulocyte-macrophage progenitors (GMPs), resulting in a myeloproliferative phenotype with accumulation of GMPs in the periphery and cellular infiltration of the liver. Expression of the transcription factor Irf8 is severely reduced in Cbfb-deficient progenitors, and overexpression of Irf8 restors DC differentiation. These results demonstrate that Runx proteins and Cbfβ restrict granulocyte lineage commitment to facilitate multilineage hematopoietic differentiation and thus identify their novel tumor suppressor function in myeloid leukemia.
A major barrier to the elimination of HIV-1 infection is the presence of a pool of long-lived, latently infected CD4+ memory T-cells. The search for treatments to re-activate latent HIV to aid in clearance is hindered by the incomplete understanding of the mechanisms that lead to transcriptional silencing of viral gene expression in host cells. Here we identify a previously unknown role for RUNX1 in HIV-1 transcriptional latency. The RUNX proteins, in combination with the co-factor CBF-β, are critical transcriptional regulators in T-cells. RUNX1 strongly modulates CD4 expression and contributes to CD4+ T-cell function. We show that RUNX1 can bind DNA sequences within the HIV-1 LTR and that this binding represses transcription. Using patient samples we show a negative correlation between RUNX1 expression and viral load. Furthermore, we find that pharmacologic inhibition of RUNX1 by a small molecule inhibitor, Ro5-3335, synergizes with the histone deacetylase (HDAC) inhibitor SAHA (Vorinostat) to enhance the activation of latent HIV-1 in both cell lines and PBMCs from patients. Our findings indicate that RUNX1 and CBF-β cooperate in cells to modulate HIV-1 replication, identifying for the first time RUNX1 as a cellular factor involved in HIV-1 latency. This work highlights the therapeutic potential of inhibitors of RUNX1 to re-activate virus and aid in clearance of HIV-1.
Runx1 is required for definitive hematopoiesis and is well known for its frequent chromosomal translocations and point mutations in leukemia. Runx1 regulates a variety of genes via Ets1 activation on an Ets1•Runx1 composite DNA sequence. The structural basis of such regulation remains unresolved. To address this problem, we determined the crystal structure of the ternary complex containing Runx1(1-242) and Ets1(296-441) bound to T-cell receptor alpha (TCRα) enhancer DNA. In the crystal, an Ets1-interacting domain of Runx1 is bound to the Ets1 DNA-binding domain and displaced an entire autoinhibitory module of Ets1, revealing a novel mechanism of Ets1 activation. The DNA-binding and transcriptional studies with a variety of structure-guided Runx1 mutants confirmed a critical role of direct Ets1•Runx1 interaction in Ets1 activation. More importantly, the discovered mechanism provides a plausible explanation for how the Ets1•Runx1 interaction effectively activates not only a wild-type Ets1, but also a highly inhibited phosphorylated form of Ets1.
Vif is a lentiviral accessory protein that regulates viral infectivity in part by inducing proteasomal degradation of APOBEC3G (A3G). Recently, CBFβ was found to facilitate Vif-dependent degradation of A3G. However, the exact role of CBFβ remains unclear. Several studies noted reduced Vif expression in CBFβ knockdown cells while others saw no significant impact of CBFβ on Vif stability. Here, we confirmed that CBFβ increases Vif steady-state levels. CBFβ affected expression of neither viral Gag nor Vpu protein, indicating that CBFβ regulates Vif expression posttranscriptionally. Kinetic studies revealed effects of CBFβ on both metabolic stability and the rate of Vif biosynthesis. These effects were dependent on the ability of CBFβ to interact with Vif. Importantly, at comparable Vif levels, CBFβ further enhanced A3G degradation, suggesting that CBFβ facilitates A3G degradation by increasing the levels of Vif and by independently augmenting the ability of Vif to target A3G for degradation. CBFβ also increased expression of RUNX1 by enhancing RUNX1 biosynthesis. Unlike Vif, however, CBFβ had no detectable effect on RUNX1 metabolic stability. We propose that CBFβ acts as a chaperone to stabilize Vif during and after synthesis and to facilitate interaction of Vif with cellular cofactors required for the efficient degradation of A3G.
In this study, we show that CBFβ has a profound effect on the expression of the HIV-1 infectivity factor Vif and the cellular transcription factor RUNX1, two proteins that physically interact with CBFβ. Kinetic studies revealed that CBFβ increases the rate of Vif and RUNX1 biosynthesis at the level of translation. Mutants of Vif unable to physically interact with CBFβ were nonresponsive to CBFβ. Our data suggest that CBFβ exerts a chaperone-like activity (i) to minimize the production of defective ribosomal products (DRiPs) by binding to nascent protein to prevent premature termination and (ii) to stabilize mature protein conformation to ensure proper function of Vif and RUNX1. Thus, we identified a novel mechanism of protein regulation that affects both viral and cellular factors and thus has broad implications beyond the immediate HIV field.
RUNX1/CBFβ (core binding factor [CBF]) is a heterodimeric transcription factor complex that is frequently involved in chromosomal translocations, point mutations, or deletions in acute leukemia. The mixed lineage leukemia (MLL) gene is also frequently involved in chromosomal translocations or partial tandem duplication in acute leukemia. The MLL protein interacts with RUNX1 and prevents RUNX1 from ubiquitin-mediated degradation. RUNX1/CBFβ recruits MLL to regulate downstream target genes. However, the functional consequence of MLL fusions on RUNX1/CBFβ activity has not been fully understood. In this report, we show that MLL fusion proteins and the N-terminal MLL portion of MLL fusions downregulate RUNX1 and CBFβ protein expression via the MLL CXXC domain and flanking regions. We confirmed this finding in Mll-Af9 knock-in mice and human M4/M5 acute myeloid leukemia (AML) cell lines, with or without MLL translocations, showing that MLL translocations cause a hypomorph phenotype of RUNX1/CBFβ. Overexpression of RUNX1 inhibits the development of AML in Mll-Af9 knock-in mice; conversely, further reducing Runx1/Cbfβ levels accelerates MLL-AF9-mediated AML in bone marrow transplantation assays. These data reveal a newly defined negative regulation of RUNX1/CBFβ by MLL fusion proteins and suggest that targeting RUNX1/CBFβ levels may be a potential therapy for MLLs.
The human immunodeficiency virus (HIV)-1 protein Vif has a central role in the neutralization of host innate defences by hijacking cellular proteasomal degradation pathways to subvert the antiviral activity of host restriction factors; however, the underlying mechanism by which Vif achieves this remains unclear. Here we report a crystal structure of the Vif-CBF-β-CUL5-ELOB-ELOC complex. The structure reveals that Vif, by means of two domains, organizes formation of the pentameric complex by interacting with CBF-β, CUL5 and ELOC. The larger domain (α/β domain) of Vif binds to the same side of CBF-β as RUNX1, indicating that Vif and RUNX1 are exclusive for CBF-β binding. Interactions of the smaller domain (α-domain) of Vif with ELOC and CUL5 are cooperative and mimic those of SOCS2 with the latter two proteins. A unique zinc-finger motif of Vif, which is located between the two Vif domains, makes no contacts with the other proteins but stabilizes the conformation of the α-domain, which may be important for Vif-CUL5 interaction. Together, our data reveal the structural basis for Vif hijacking of the CBF-β and CUL5 E3 ligase complex, laying a foundation for rational design of novel anti-HIV drugs.
Rearrangements involving the RUNX1 gene account for approximately 15% of balanced translocations in therapy-related acute myeloid leukemia (t-AML) patients and are one of the most common genetic abnormalities observed in t-AML. Drugs targeting the topoisomerase II (TOP2) enzyme are implicated in t-AML; however, the mechanism is not well understood and to date a single RUNX1-RUNX1T1 t-AML breakpoint junction sequence has been published. Here we report an additional five breakpoint junction sequences from t-AML patients with the RUNX1- RUNX1T1 translocation. Using a leukemia cell line model, we show that TOP2 beta (TOP2B) is required for induction of RUNX1 chromosomal breaks by the TOP2 poison etoposide and that, while TOP2 alpha (TOP2A) and TOP2B proteins are both present on RUNX1 and RUNX1T1 chromatin, only the TOP2B enrichment reached significance following etoposide exposure at a region on RUNX1 where translocations occur. Furthermore, we demonstrate that TOP2B influences the separation between RUNX1 and two translocation partners (RUNX1T1 and EVI) in the nucleus of lymphoid cells. Specifically, we identified a TOP2B-dependent increase in the number of nuclei displaying juxtaposed RUNX1 and RUNX1T1 loci following etoposide treatment.
The genetics of acute lymphoblastic leukemia are becoming well understood and the incidence of individual chromosomal abnormalities varies considerably with age. Cytogenetics provide reliable risk stratification for treatment: high hyperdiploidy and ETV6-RUNX1 are good risk, whereas BCR-ABL1, MLL rearrangements, and hypodiploidy are poor risk. Nevertheless, some patients within the good- and intermediate-risk groups will unpredictably relapse. With advancing technologies in array-based approaches (single nucleotide polymorphism arrays) and next-generation sequencing to study the genome, increasing numbers of new genetic changes are being discovered. These include deletions of B-cell differentiation and cell cycle control genes, as well as mutations of genes in key signaling pathways. Their associations and interactions with established cytogenetic subgroups and with each other are becoming elucidated. Whether they have a link to outcome is the most important factor for refinement of risk factors in relation to clinical trials. For several newly identified abnormalities, including intrachromosomal amplification of chromosome 21 (iAMP21), that are associated with a poor prognosis with standard therapy, appropriately modified treatment has significantly improved outcome. After the successful use of tyrosine kinase inhibitors in the treatment of BCR-ABL1-positive acute lymphoblastic leukemia, patients with alternative ABL1 translocations and rearrangements involving PDGFRB may benefit from treatment with tyrosine kinase inhibitors. Other aberrations, for example, CRLF2 overexpression and JAK2 mutations, are also providing potential novel therapeutic targets with the prospect of reduced toxicity.
Glycogen synthase kinase (GSK)-3β plays an important role in osteoblastogenesis by regulating the Wnt/β-catenin signaling pathway. Therefore, we investigated whether GSK-3β deficiency affects bone development and regeneration using mice heterozygously deficient for GSK-3β (GSK-3β(+/-)). The amounts of β-catenin, c-Myc, cyclin D1, and runt-related transcription factor-2 (Runx2) in the bone marrow cells of GSK-3β(+/-) mice were significantly increased compared with those of wild-type mice, indicating that Wnt/β-catenin signals were enhanced in GSK-3β(+/-) mice. Microcomputed tomography of the distal femoral metaphyses demonstrated that the volumes of both the cortical and trabecular bones were increased in GSK-3β(+/-) mice compared with those in wild-type mice. Subsequently, to investigate the effect of GSK-3β deficiency on bone regeneration, we established a partial bone defect in the femur and observed new bone at 14 days after surgery. The volume and mineral density of the new bone were significantly higher in GSK-3β(+/-) mice than those in wild-type mice. These results suggest that bone formation and regeneration in vivo are accelerated by inhibition of GSK-3β, probably through activation of the Wnt/β-catenin signaling pathway.
Different mechanisms for CBFβ-MYH11 function in acute myeloid leukemia with inv(16) have been proposed such as tethering of RUNX1 outside the nucleus, interference with transcription factor complex assembly and recruitment of histone deacetylases, all resulting in transcriptional repression of RUNX1 target genes. Here, through genome-wide CBFβ-MYH11-binding site analysis and quantitative interaction proteomics, we found that CBFβ-MYH11 localizes to RUNX1 occupied promoters, where it interacts with TAL1, FLI1 and TBP-associated factors (TAFs) in the context of the hematopoietic transcription factors ERG, GATA2 and PU.1/SPI1 and the coregulators EP300 and HDAC1. Transcriptional analysis revealed that upon fusion protein knockdown, a small subset of the CBFβ-MYH11 target genes show increased expression, confirming a role in transcriptional repression. However, the majority of CBFβ-MYH11 target genes, including genes implicated in hematopoietic stem cell self-renewal such as ID1, LMO1 and JAG1, are actively transcribed and repressed upon fusion protein knockdown. Together these results suggest an essential role for CBFβ-MYH11 in regulating the expression of genes involved in maintaining a stem cell phenotype.
While transforming growth factor β (TGFβ) signaling plays a critical role in chondrocyte metabolism, the TGFβ signaling pathways and target genes involved in cartilage homeostasis and the development of osteoarthritis (OA) remain unclear. Using an in vitro cell culture method and an in vivo mouse genetic approach, we undertook this study to investigate TGFβ signaling in chondrocytes and to determine whether Mmp13 and Adamts5 are critical downstream target genes of TGFβ signaling.
TGFβ receptor type II (TGFβRII)-conditional knockout (KO) (TGFβRII(Col2ER)) mice were generated by breeding TGFβRII(flox/flox) mice with Col2-CreER-transgenic mice. Histologic, histomorphometric, and gene expression analyses were performed. In vitro TGFβ signaling studies were performed using chondrogenic rat chondrosarcoma cells. To determine whether Mmp13 and Adamts5 are critical downstream target genes of TGFβ signaling, TGFβRII/matrix metalloproteinase 13 (MMP-13)- and TGFβRII/ADAMTS-5-double-KO mice were generated and analyzed.
Inhibition of TGFβ signaling (deletion of the Tgfbr2 gene in chondrocytes) resulted in up-regulation of Runx2, Mmp13, and Adamts5 expression in articular cartilage tissue and progressive OA development in TGFβRII(Col2ER) mice. Deletion of the Mmp13 or Adamts5 gene significantly ameliorated the OA-like phenotype induced by the loss of TGFβ signaling. Treatment of TGFβRII(Col2ER) mice with an MMP-13 inhibitor also slowed OA progression.
Mmp13 and Adamts5 are critical downstream target genes involved in the TGFβ signaling pathway during the development of OA.
RUNX1 is generally considered a tumor suppressor in myeloid neoplasms. Inactivating RUNX1 mutations have frequently been found in patients with myelodysplastic syndrome (MDS) and cytogenetically normal acute myeloid leukemia (AML). However, no somatic RUNX1 alteration was found in AMLs with leukemogenic fusion proteins, such as core-binding factor (CBF) leukemia and MLL fusion leukemia, raising the possibility that RUNX1 could actually promote the growth of these leukemia cells. Using normal human cord blood cells and those expressing leukemogenic fusion proteins, we discovered a dual role of RUNX1 in myeloid leukemogenesis. RUNX1 overexpression inhibited the growth of normal cord blood cells by inducing myeloid differentiation, whereas a certain level of RUNX1 activity was required for the growth of AML1-ETO and MLL-AF9 cells. Using a mouse genetic model, we also showed that the combined loss of Runx1/Cbfb inhibited leukemia development induced by MLL-AF9. RUNX2 could compensate for the loss of RUNX1. The survival effect of RUNX1 was mediated by BCL2 in MLL fusion leukemia. Our study unveiled an unexpected prosurvival role for RUNX1 in myeloid leukemogenesis. Inhibiting RUNX1 activity rather than enhancing it could be a promising therapeutic strategy for AMLs with leukemogenic fusion proteins.
The transcription factor Runx1 is essential for the formation of yolk sac-derived erythroid/myeloid progenitors (EMPs) and hematopoietic stem cells (HSCs) from hemogenic endothelium during embryogenesis. However, long-term repopulating HSCs (LT-HSCs) persist when Runx1 is conditionally deleted in fetal liver cells, demonstrating that the requirement for Runx1 changes over time. To define more precisely when Runx1 transitions from an essential factor to a homeostatic regulator of EMPs and HSCs, and whether that transition requires fetal liver colonization, we performed conditional, timed deletions of Runx1 between E7.5 and E13.5. We determined that Runx1 loss reduces the formation or function of EMPs up through E10.5. The Runx1 requirement in HSCs ends later, as deletion up to E11.5 eliminates HSCs. At E11.5, there is an abrupt transition to Runx1 independence in at least a subset of HSCs that does not require fetal liver colonization. The transition to Runx1 independence in EMPs is not mediated by other core binding factors (Runx2 and/or Runx3); however, deleting the common non-DNA-binding β subunit (CBFβ) severely compromises LT-HSC function. Hence, the requirements for Runx1 in EMP and HSC formation are temporally distinct, and LT-HSC function is highly reliant on continued core binding factor activity.
Familial platelet disorder (FPD) is a rare autosomal dominant disease characterized by thrombocytopenia and abnormal platelet function. Causal mutations have been identified in the gene encoding runt-related transcription factor 1 (RUNX1) of FPD patients.
To elucidate the role of RUNX1 in the regulation of expression of platelet factor 4 (PF4) and to propose a plausible mechanism underlying RUNX1-mediated induction of the FPD phenotype.
We assessed whether RUNX1 and its mutants, in combination with E26 transformation-specific-1 (ETS-1), Core-binding factor subunit beta (CBFβ), and Friend leukemia virus integration 1 (FLI-1), cooperatively regulate PF4 expression during megakaryocytic differentiation. In an embryonic stem cell differentiation system, expression levels of endogenous and exogenous RUNX1 and PF4 were determined by real-time RT-PCR. Promoter activation by the transcription factors were evaluated by reporter gene assays with HepG2 cells. DNA binding activity and protein interaction were analyzed by electrophoretic mobility shift assay and immunoprecipitation assay with Cos-7 cells, respectively. Protein localization was analyzed by immunocytochemistry and Western blotting with Cos-7 cells.
We demonstrated that RUNX1 activates endogenous PF4 expression in megakaryocytic differentiation. RUNX1, but not its mutants, in combination with ETS-1 and CBFβ, or FLI-1, synergistically activated the PF4 promoter. Each RUNX1 mutant harbors various functional abnormalities, including loss of DNA-binding activity, abnormal subcellular localization, and/or alterations of binding affinities for ETS-1, CBFβ, and FLI-1.
RUNX1, but not its mutants, strongly and synergistically activates PF4 expression along with ETS family proteins. Furthermore, loss of the RUNX1 transcriptional activation function is induced by various functional abnormalities.
Core Binding Factor β (CBFβ) is complexed with the RUNX family of transcription factors in the nucleus to support activation or repression of genes related to bone (RUNX2), hematopoiesis (RUNX1) and gastrointestinal (RUNX3) development. Furthermore, RUNX proteins contribute to the onset and progression of different types of cancer. Although CBFβ localizes to cytoskeletal architecture, its biological role in the cytoplasmic compartment remains to be established. Additionally, the function and localization of CBFβ during the cell cycle are important questions relevant to its biological role. Here we show that CBFβ dynamically distributes in different stages of cell division and importantly is present during telophase at the midbody, a temporal structure important for successful cytokinesis. A functional role for CBFβ localization at the midbody is supported by striking defects in cytokinesis that include polyploidy and abscission failure following siRNA-mediated downregulation of endogenous CBFβ or overexpression of the inv(16) fusion protein CBFβ-SMMHC. Our results suggest that CBFβ retention in the midbody during cytokinesis reflects a novel function that contributes to epigenetic control.
Core Binding Factor acute myeloid leukemia (CBF-AML) with t(8;21) RUNX1-MTG8 or inv(16) CBFB-MYH11 fusion proteins often show upregulation of wild type or mutated KIT receptor. However, also non-CBF-AML frequently displays upregulated KIT expression. In the first part of this study we show that KIT expression can be also upregulated by miR-17, a regulator of RUNX1, the gene encoding a CBF subunit. Interestingly, both CBF leukemia fusion proteins and miR-17, which targets RUNX1-3'UTR, negatively affect a common core RUNX1-miRNA mechanism that forces myeloid cells into an undifferentiated, KIT-induced, proliferating state. In the second part of this study we took advantage of the conservation of the core RUNX1-miRNA mechanism in mouse and human, to mechanistically demonstrate in a mouse myeloid cell model that increased KIT-induced proliferation is per se a mechanism sufficient to delay myeloid differentiation.
Human (U937) or mouse (32D) myeloid clonal lines were used, respectively, to test: 1) the effect of RUNX1-MTG8 and CBFB-MYH11 fusion proteins, or upregulation of miR-17, on KIT-induced proliferation and myeloid differentiation, and 2) the effect of upregulation of KIT-induced proliferation per se on myeloid cell differentiation.
In the first part of this study we found that stable miR-17 upregulation affects, like the CBF-AML fusion proteins (RUNX1-MTG8 or CBFB-MYH11), a core RUNX1-miRNA mechanism leading to KIT-induced proliferation of differentiation-arrested U937 myeloid cells. In the second part of the study we harnessed the conservation of this core mechanism in human and mouse to demonstrate that the extent of KIT upregulation in 32D mouse myeloid cells with wild type RUNX1 can per se delay G-CSF-induced differentiation. The integrated information gathered from the two myeloid cell models shows that RUNX1 regulates myeloid differentiation not only by direct transcriptional regulation of coding and non-coding myeloid differentiation functions (e.g. miR-223), but also by modulating KIT-induced proliferation via non-coding miRNAs (e.g. miR-221).
The novelty of this study is dual. On the one hand, miRNAs (e.g. miR-17) can mimic the effects of CBF-AML fusion proteins by affecting a core RUNX1-miRNA mechanism of KIT-induced proliferation of undifferentiated myeloid cells. On the other hand, the extent of KIT-induced proliferation itself can modulate myeloid differentiation of cells with wild type RUNX1 function.
CBFβ and RUNX1 form a DNA-binding heterodimer and are both required for hematopoietic stem cell (HSC) generation in mice. However, the exact role of CBFβ in the production of HSCs remains unclear. Here, we generated and characterized 2 zebrafish cbfb null mutants. The cbfb(-/-) embryos underwent primitive hematopoiesis and developed transient erythromyeloid progenitors, but they lacked definitive hematopoiesis. Unlike runx1 mutants, in which HSCs are not formed, nascent, runx1(+)/c-myb(+) HSCs were formed in cbfb(-/-) embryos. However, the nascent HSCs were not released from the aorta-gonad-mesonephros (AGM) region, as evidenced by the accumulation of runx1(+) cells in the AGM that could not enter circulation. Moreover, wild-type embryos treated with an inhibitor of RUNX1-CBFβ interaction, Ro5-3335, phenocopied the hematopoietic defects in cbfb(-/-) mutants, rather than those in runx1(-/-) mutants. Finally, we found that cbfb was downstream of the Notch pathway during HSC development. Our data suggest that runx1 and cbfb are required at 2 different steps during early HSC development. CBFβ is not required for nascent HSC emergence but is required for the release of HSCs from AGM into circulation. Our results also indicate that RUNX1 can drive the emergence of nascent HSCs in the AGM without its heterodimeric partner CBFβ.
The rare but recurrent RUNX1-USP42 fusion gene is the result of a t(7;21)(p22;q22) chromosomal translocation and has been described in 6 cases of acute myeloid leukemia (AML) and one case of refractory anemia with excess of blast. In the present study, we present the molecular genetic analysis and the clinical features of a t(7;21)(p22;q22)-positive AML case. PCR amplified two RUNX1-USP42 cDNA fragments but no reciprocal USP42-RUNX1 fragment indicating that the RUNX1-USP42 is the leukemogenic fusion gene. Sequencing of the two amplified fragments showed that exon 6 or exon 7 of RUNX1 (accession number NM_001754 version 3) was fused to exon 3 of USP42 (accession number NM_032172 version 2). The predicted RUNX1-USP42 fusion protein would contain the Runt homology domain (RHD), which is responsible for heterodimerization with CBFB and for DNA binding, and the catalytic UCH (ubiquitin carboxyl terminal hydroxylase) domain of the USP42 protein. The bone marrow cells in the present case also had a 5q deletion, and it was revealed that 5 out of the 8 reported cases (including the present case) with t(7;21)(p22;q22)/RUNX1-USP42 also had cytogenetic abnormalities of 5q. The fact that t(7;21) and 5q- occur together much more often than chance would allow seems to be unquestionable, although the pathogenetic connection between the two aberrations remains unknown.
Most patients with acute myeloid leukemia (AML) and genetic rearrangements involving the core binding factor (CBF) have favorable prognosis. In contrast, a minority of them still have a high risk of leukemia recurrence. This study investigated the adverse features of CBF AML that could justify investigational therapeutic approaches.
One hundred and fifty patients (median age 42 yr, range 16-69) with CBF AML (RUNX1-RUNX1T1 n = 74; CBFB-MYH11 n = 76) were prospectively enrolled into two consecutive CETLAM protocols at 19 Spanish institutions. Main clinic and biologic parameters were analyzed in the whole series. In non-selected cases with available DNA samples, the impact of molecular characterization and minimal residual disease (MRD) was also studied.
Overall, complete remission (CR) rate was 89% (94% in ≤50 yr old and 72% in >50 yr, P = 0.002). At 5 yr, cumulative incidence of relapse (CIR) was 26 ± 1%, disease-free survival (DFS) 62 ± 6%, and overall survival (OS) 66 ± 4%. In multivariate analyses, leukocyte count above 20 × 10(9) /L, BAALC over-expression, and high copy numbers of RUNX1-RUNXT1 or CBFB-MYH11 after induction chemotherapy (CT) led to increased relapse rate. Regarding OS, age >50 yr, leukocyte count above 20 × 10(9) /L, and increased MN1 expression were adverse features.
Age, leukocyte counts, BAALC, and MN1 gene expressions as well as high copy numbers of RUNX1-RUNXT1 or CBFB-MYH11 after induction chemotherapy are useful tools to predict the outcome and should be considered for risk-adapted therapy.
Core binding factor (CBF)-positive acute myeloid leukemia (AML) presents a favorable prognosis, except for patients with KIT mutation, especially D816 mutation. The current retrospective study attempted to validate a prognostic role of KIT mutation in 121 Korean patients with CBF AML. The study patients consisted of 121 patients with CBF AML (82 patients with RUNX1/RUNX1T1 [67.8 %] and 39 patients with CBFB/MYH11 [32.2 %]) recruited from eight institutions in Korea. All patients received idarubicin plus cytarabine or behenoyl cytosine arabinoside 3 + 7 induction chemotherapy. The KIT gene mutation status was determined by direct sequencing analyses. A KIT mutation was detected in 32 cases (26.4 %) in our series of patients. The KIT mutation was most frequent in exon 17 (n = 18, 14.9 %; n = 16 with D816 mutation), followed by exon 8 (n = 10, 8.3 %). The presence of KIT D816 mutation was associated with adverse outcomes for the event-free survival (p = 0.03) and for the overall survival (p = 0.02). The unfavorable impact of D816 mutation was more prominent when the analysis was confined to the RUNX1/RUNX1T1 subtype. The KIT mutation was detected in 26.4 % of Korean patients with CBF AML. The KIT D816 mutation demonstrated an unfavorable prognostic implication, particularly in the RUNX1/RUNX1T1 subtype.
Core binding factor (CBF) leukemias, those with translocations or inversions that affect transcription factor genes RUNX1 or CBFB, account for ~24% of adult acute myeloid leukemia (AML) and 25% of pediatric acute lymphocytic leukemia (ALL). Current treatments for CBF leukemias are associated with significant morbidity and mortality, with a 5-y survival rate of ~50%. We hypothesize that the interaction between RUNX1 and CBFβ is critical for CBF leukemia and can be targeted for drug development. We developed high-throughput AlphaScreen and time-resolved fluorescence resonance energy transfer (TR-FRET) methods to quantify the RUNX1-CBFβ interaction and screen a library collection of 243,398 compounds. Ro5-3335, a benzodiazepine identified from the screen, was able to interact with RUNX1 and CBFβ directly, repress RUNX1/CBFB-dependent transactivation in reporter assays, and repress runx1-dependent hematopoiesis in zebrafish embryos. Ro5-3335 preferentially killed human CBF leukemia cell lines, rescued preleukemic phenotype in a RUNX1-ETO transgenic zebrafish, and reduced leukemia burden in a mouse CBFB-MYH11 leukemia model. Our data thus confirmed that RUNX1-CBFβ interaction can be targeted for leukemia treatment and we have identified a promising lead compound for this purpose.
The clinical value of serial minimal residual disease (MRD) monitoring in core binding factor (CBF) acute myeloid leukemia (AML) by quantitative RT-PCR was prospectively assessed in 278 patients [163 with t(8;21) and 115 with inv(16)] entered in the United Kingdom MRC AML 15 trial. CBF transcripts were normalized to 10(5) ABL copies. At remission, after course 1 induction chemotherapy, a > 3 log reduction in RUNX1-RUNX1T1 transcripts in BM in t(8;21) patients and a > 10 CBFB-MYH11 copy number in peripheral blood (PB) in inv(16) patients were the most useful prognostic variables for relapse risk on multivariate analysis. MRD levels after consolidation (course 3) were also informative. During follow-up, cut-off MRD thresholds in BM and PB associated with a 100% relapse rate were identified: for t(8;21) patients BM > 500 copies, PB > 100 copies; for inv(16) patients, BM > 50 copies and PB > 10 copies. Rising MRD levels on serial monitoring accurately predicted hematologic relapse. During follow-up, PB sampling was equally informative as BM for MRD detection. We conclude that MRD monitoring by quantitative RT-PCR at specific time points in CBF AML allows identification of patients at high risk of relapse and could now be incorporated in clinical trials to evaluate the role of risk directed/preemptive therapy.
Breast carcinoma is the leading cause of cancer-related mortality in women worldwide, with an estimated 1.38 million new cases and 458,000 deaths in 2008 alone. This malignancy represents a heterogeneous group of tumours with characteristic molecular features, prognosis and responses to available therapy. Recurrent somatic alterations in breast cancer have been described, including mutations and copy number alterations, notably ERBB2 amplifications, the first successful therapy target defined by a genomic aberration. Previous DNA sequencing studies of breast cancer genomes have revealed additional candidate mutations and gene rearrangements. Here we report the whole-exome sequences of DNA from 103 human breast cancers of diverse subtypes from patients in Mexico and Vietnam compared to matched-normal DNA, together with whole-genome sequences of 22 breast cancer/normal pairs. Beyond confirming recurrent somatic mutations in PIK3CA, TP53, AKT1, GATA3 and MAP3K1, we discovered recurrent mutations in the CBFB transcription factor gene and deletions of its partner RUNX1. Furthermore, we have identified a recurrent MAGI3-AKT3 fusion enriched in triple-negative breast cancer lacking oestrogen and progesterone receptors and ERBB2 expression. The MAGI3-AKT3 fusion leads to constitutive activation of AKT kinase, which is abolished by treatment with an ATP-competitive AKT small-molecule inhibitor.
Osteoarthritis (OA) is a degenerative joint disease that involves the destruction of articular cartilage and eventually leads to disability. Molecules that promote the selective differentiation of multipotent mesenchymal stem cells (MSCs) into chondrocytes may stimulate the repair of damaged cartilage. Using an image-based high-throughput screen, we identified the small molecule kartogenin, which promotes chondrocyte differentiation (median effective concentration = 100 nM), shows chondroprotective effects in vitro, and is efficacious in two OA animal models. Kartogenin binds filamin A, disrupts its interaction with the transcription factor core-binding factor β subunit (CBFβ), and induces chondrogenesis by regulating the CBFβ-RUNX1 transcriptional program. This work provides new insights into the control of chondrogenesis that may ultimately lead to a stem cell-based therapy for osteoarthritis.
Polycomb repressive complexes (PRCs) play key roles in developmental epigenetic regulation. Yet the mechanisms that target PRCs to specific loci in mammalian cells remain incompletely understood. In this study we show that Bmi1, a core component of Polycomb Repressive Complex 1 (PRC1), binds directly to the Runx1/CBFβ transcription factor complex. Genome-wide studies in megakaryocytic cells demonstrate significant chromatin occupancy overlap between the PRC1 core component Ring1b and Runx1/CBFβ and functional regulation of a considerable fraction of commonly bound genes. Bmi1/Ring1b and Runx1/CBFβ deficiencies generate partial phenocopies of one another in vivo. We also show that Ring1b occupies key Runx1 binding sites in primary murine thymocytes and that this occurs via PRC2-independent mechanisms. Genetic depletion of Runx1 results in reduced Ring1b binding at these sites in vivo. These findings provide evidence for site-specific PRC1 chromatin recruitment by core binding transcription factors in mammalian cells.
Translocations and mutations in the core binding factor genes, RUNX1 or CBFB, are found in acute myeloid and lymphocytic leukemia, therapy-related myeloid leukemia, myelodysplastic syndrome, chronic myelomonocytic leukemia, and in familial platelet disorder with predisposition to acute myeloid leukemia. Here we review the biochemical and biological properties of the normal Runx1 protein, discuss the nature of RUNX1 mutations in myeloid leukemia, their prognostic significance, and the mutations that cooperate or co-exist with them in these various diseases.
The KIT D816V mutation is detected in the vast majority of adult cases of systemic mastocytosis (SM). The mutation is also frequently detected in core-binding factor acute myeloid leukemia (CBF AML) defined by the presence of t(8;21)(q22;q22); RUNX1-RUNX1T1 or inv(16)(p13.1;q22)/t(16;16)(p13.1;q22); CBFB-MYH11 chromosomal rearrangements, but whether the mutation is indicative of associated SM is unclear. In the present study, patients with CBF AML were therefore analyzed for the KIT D816V mutation and mutation positive cases subsequently analyzed for the presence of SM. The KIT D816V mutation was detected in eight of 20 cases of CBF AML, with the frequency in t(8;21)(q22;q22) and inv(16)(p13.1;q22) positive cases being 31% and 57%, respectively. The fraction of KIT D816V mutation positive cells was highly variable among the eight mutation positive patients, with levels ranging from 0.04 to 98% in a pretreatment blood sample. Five of the eight cases carried the mutation in a cell fraction below one-tenth of the blast cell fraction, thus suggesting that KIT mutation is often a late event in leukemogenesis. None of the eight KIT D816V mutation positive cases fulfilled the World Health Organization diagnostic criteria of SM. The presence of the KIT D816V mutation in the CBF AML subgroup can therefore not be considered indicative of associated SM.
Hematopoietic stem cells (HSCs) and an earlier wave of definitive erythroid/myeloid progenitors (EMPs) differentiate from hemogenic endothelial cells in the conceptus. EMPs can be generated in vitro from embryonic or induced pluripotent stem cells, but efforts to produce HSCs have largely failed. The formation of both EMPs and HSCs requires the transcription factor Runx1 and its non-DNA binding partner core binding factor β (CBFβ). Here we show that the requirements for CBFβ in EMP and HSC formation in the conceptus are temporally and spatially distinct. Panendothelial expression of CBFβ in Tek-expressing cells was sufficient for EMP formation, but was not adequate for HSC formation. Expression of CBFβ in Ly6a-expressing cells, on the other hand, was sufficient for HSC, but not EMP, formation. The data indicate that EMPs and HSCs differentiate from distinct populations of hemogenic endothelial cells, with Ly6a expression specifically marking the HSC-generating hemogenic endothelium.
The mixed-lineage leukemia (MLL) H3K4 methyltransferase protein, and the heterodimeric RUNX1/CBFβ transcription factor complex, are critical for definitive and adult hematopoiesis, and both are frequently targeted in human acute leukemia. We identified a physical and functional interaction between RUNX1 (AML1) and MLL and show that both are required to maintain the histone lysine 4 trimethyl mark (H3K4me3) at 2 critical regulatory regions of the AML1 target gene PU.1. Similar to CBFβ, we show that MLL binds to AML1 abrogating its proteasome-dependent degradation. Furthermore, a subset of previously uncharacterized frame-shift and missense mutations at the N terminus of AML1, found in MDS and AML patients, impairs its interaction with MLL, resulting in loss of the H3K4me3 mark within PU.1 regulatory regions, and decreased PU.1 expression. The interaction between MLL and AML1 provides a mechanism for the sequence-specific binding of MLL to DNA, and identifies RUNX1 target genes as potential effectors of MLL function.
RUNX1 and CBFB are among the most frequently mutated genes in human leukemias. Genetic alterations such as chromosomal translocations, copy number variations and point mutations have been widely reported to result in the malfunction of RUNX transcription factors. Leukemias arising from such alterations in RUNX family genes are collectively termed core binding factor (CBF) leukemias. Although adult CBF leukemias generally are considered a favorable risk group as compared with other forms of acute myeloid leukemia, the 5-year survival rate remains low. An improved understanding of the molecular mechanism for CBF leukemia is imperative to uncover novel treatment options. Over the years, retroviral transduction-transplantation assays and transgenic, knockin and knockout mouse models alone or in combination with mutagenesis have been used to study the roles of RUNX alterations in leukemogenesis. Although successful in inducing leukemia, the existing assays and models possess many inherent limitations. A CBF leukemia model which induces leukemia with complete penetrance and short latency would be ideal as a platform for drug discovery. Here, we summarize the currently available mouse models which have been utilized to study CBF leukemias, discuss the advantages and limitations of individual experimental systems, and propose suggestions for improvements of mouse models.
Core binding factor β (Cbfβ) is a partner protein of Runx family transcription factors with minimally characterized function in cartilage. Here we address the role of Cbfβ in cartilage by generating chondrocyte-specific Cbfβ-deficient mice (Cbfb(Δch/Δch) ) from Cbfb-floxed mice crossed with mice expressing Cre from the Col2a1 promoter. Cbfb(Δch/Δch) mice died soon after birth and exhibited delayed endochondral bone formation, shorter appendicular skeleton length with increased proliferative chondrocytes, and nearly absent hypertrophic chondrocyte zones. Immunohistochemical and quantitative real-time PCR analyses showed that the number and size of proliferative chondrocytes increased and the expression of chondrocyte maturation markers at the growth plates, including Runx2, osterix, and osteopontin, significantly diminished in Cbfb(Δch/Δch) mice compared to wild type mice. With regard to signaling pathways, both PTHrP-Ihh and BMP signaling were compromised in Cbfb(Δch/Δch) mice. Mechanistically, Cbfβ deficiency in chondrocytes caused a decrease of protein levels of Runx transcription factors by accelerating polyubiquitination-mediated proteosomal degradation in vitro. Indeed, Runx2 and Runx3, but not Runx1, decreased in Cbfb(Δch/Δch) mice. Collectively, these findings indicate that Cbfβ plays a critical role for chondrocyte differentiation through stabilizing Runx2 and Runx3 proteins in cartilage J. Cell. Physiol. 230: 162-171, 2016. © 2015 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.
CBFβ-SMMHC (core-binding factor β-smooth muscle myosin heavy chain), the fusion protein generated by the chromosome 16 inversion fusion gene, CBFB-MYH11, is known to initiate leukemogenesis. However, the mechanism through which CBFβ-SMMHC contributes to leukemia development is not well understood. Previously, it was proposed that CBFβ-SMMHC acts by dominantly repressing the transcription factor RUNX1 (Runt-related protein 1), but we recently showed that CBFβ-SMMHC has activities that are independent of RUNX1 repression. In addition, we showed that a modified CBFβ-SMMHC with decreased RUNX1-binding activity accelerates leukemogenesis. These results raise questions about the importance of RUNX1 in leukemogenesis by CBFβ-SMMHC. To test this, we generated mice expressing Cbfb-MYH11 in a Runx1-deficient background, resulting from either homozygous Runx1-null alleles (Runx1(-/-)) or a single dominant-negative Runx1 allele (Runx1(+/lz)). We found that loss of Runx1 activity rescued the differentiation defects induced by Cbfb-MYH11 during primitive hematopoiesis. During definitive hematopoiesis, RUNX1 loss also significantly reduced the proliferation and differentiation defects induced by Cbfb-MYH11. Importantly, Cbfb-MYH11-induced leukemia had much longer latency in Runx1(+/lz) mice than in Runx1-sufficient mice. These data indicate that Runx1 activity is critical for Cbfb-MYH11-induced hematopoietic defects and leukemogenesis.
In a patient with acute myeloid leukemia (AML) following therapy, finding ≥5% bone marrow (BM) blasts is highly concerning for residual/relapsed disease. Over an 18-month period, we performed multicolor flow cytometry immunophenotyping (MFC) for AML minimal residual disease on >4,000 BM samples, and identified 41 patients who had ≥5% myeloblasts by morphology but negative by MFC. At the time of a negative MFC study, an abnormal cytogenetic study converted to negative in 14 patients and remained positive at a low level (2.5-9.5%) by fluorescence in situ hybridization in 3 (14%), of the latter, abnormalities subsequently disappeared in the repeated BM in 2 patients. Positive pretreatment mutations, including FLT3, NPM1, IDH1, CEBPA, became negative in all 10 patients tested. Of the seven patients with favorable cytogenetics, PML/RARA, CBFB-MYH11 or RUNX1-RUNX1T1 fusion transcripts were detected at various levels in six patients but all patients remained in complete remission. With no additional chemotherapy given, 39 patients had BM repeated (median 2 weeks, range <1-21), and all cases showed <5% BM blasts and a continuously negative MFC. In the end of follow-up (median 10 months, range 1-22), 13 patients experienced relapse, 12/13 showing clonal cytogenetic evolution/switch and 11 demonstrating major immunophenotypic shifts. We conclude that MFC is useful in identifying a regenerating BM sample with ≥5% BM blasts that would otherwise be scored as positive using standard morphologic examination. We believe this conclusion is supported by the changes in molecular cytogenetic status and the patient clinical follow-up data.
Core-binding factor acute myeloid leukemia is a favorable acute myeloid leukemia subset cytogenetically defined by t(8;21) or inv(16)/t(16;16) rearrangements, disrupting RUNX1 (previously CBFA/AML1) or CBFB transcription factor functions. The receptor tyrosine kinase KIT is expressed in the vast majority of these acute myeloid leukemias and frequent activating KIT gene mutations have been associated with a higher risk of relapse. This phase II study aimed to evaluate dasatinib as maintenance therapy in patients with core-binding factor acute myeloid leukemia in first hematologic complete remission, but at higher risk of relapse due to molecular disease persistence or recurrence. A total of 26 patients aged 18-60 years old previously included in the CBF-2006 trial were eligible to receive dasatinib 140 mg daily if they had a poor initial molecular response (n=18) or a molecular recurrence (n=8). The tolerance of dasatinib as maintenance therapy was satisfactory. The 2-year disease-free survival in this high-risk population of patients was 25.7%. All but one patient with molecular recurrence presented subsequent hematologic relapse. Patients with slow initial molecular response had a similar disease-free survival when treated with dasatinib (40.2% at 2 years) or without any maintenance (50.0% at 2 years). The disappearance of KIT gene mutations at relapse suggests that clonal devolution may in part explain the absence of efficacy observed with single-agent dasatinib in these patients (n. EudraCT: 2006-006555-12).
In acute myeloid leukaemia (AML), the presence of t(8;21)(q22;q22) and inv(16)(p13q22)/t(16;16)(p13;q22) and/or the corresponding molecular rearrangements RUNX1/RUNX1T1 and CBFB/MYH11 [collectively referred to as core binding factor (CBF) AML] predict for a more favourable outcome in patients receiving cytarabine-anthracycline based induction and upon achievement of complete remission, high-dose cytarabine consolidation chemotherapy. However, 40-45% of these patients eventually relapse and die of their disease. Here, we review emerging molecular and therapeutic results that may be used to guide the clinical management of this subset of patients.
Integration of cytogenetic results with molecular genetic and epigenetic data refines the diagnosis, classification and risk-stratification of CBF AML. Clinical studies with targeting compounds (e.g. gemtuzumab ozogamicin, dasatinib) added to intensive chemotherapy appear beneficial both in younger and older patients, albeit the latter continue to have a significantly worse outcome than the former. Regularly molecular monitoring of disease during remission may provide a strategy for early therapeutic intervention before overt relapse.
Emerging evidence supports that novel diagnostic, treatment and molecular disease monitoring approaches may improve the prognosis of CBF AML.
Core-binding factor acute myeloid leukemia (CBF-AML) - including AML with t(8;21) and AML with inv(16) - accounts for about 15% of adult AML and is associated with a relatively favorable prognosis. Nonetheless, relapse incidence may reach 40% in these patients. In this context, identification of prognostic markers is considered of great interest. Due to similarities between their molecular and prognostic features, t(8;21) and inv(16)-AML are usually grouped and reported together in clinical studies. However, considerable experimental evidences have highlighted that they represent two distinct entities and should be considered separately for further studies. This review summarizes recent laboratory and clinical findings in this particular subset of AML and how they could be used to improve management of patients in routine practice.
Runx family proteins, Runx1, Runx2, and Runx3, play important roles in skeletal development. Runx2 is required for osteoblast differentiation and chondrocyte maturation, and haplodeficiency of RUNX2 causes cleidocranial dysplasia, which is characterized by open fontanelles and sutures and hypoplastic clavicles. Cbfb forms a heterodimer with Runx family proteins and enhances their DNA-binding capacity. Cbfb-deficient (Cbfb(-/-) ) mice die at midgestation because of the lack of fetal liver hematopoiesis. We previously reported that the partial rescue of hematopoiesis in Cbfb(-/-) mice revealed the requirement of Cbfb in skeletal development. However, the precise functions of Cbfb in skeletal development still remain to be clarified. We deleted Cbfb in mesenchymal cells giving rise to both chondrocyte and osteoblast lineages by mating Cbfb(fl/fl) mice with Dermo1 Cre knock-in mice. Cbfb(fl/fl/Cre) mice showed dwarfism, both intramembranous and endochondral ossifications were retarded, and chondrocyte maturation and proliferation and osteoblast differentiation were inhibited. The differentiation of chondrocytes and osteoblasts were severely inhibited in vitro, and the reporter activities of Ihh, Col10a1, and Bglap2 promoter constructs were reduced in Cbfb(fl/fl/Cre) chondrocytes or osteoblasts. The proteins of Runx1, Runx2, and Runx3 were reduced in the cartilaginous limb skeletons and calvariae of Cbfb(fl/fl/Cre) embryos compared with the respective protein in the respective tissue of Cbfb(fl/fl) embryos at E15.5, although the reduction of Runx2 protein in calvariae was much milder than that in cartilaginous limb skeletons. All of the Runx family proteins were severely reduced in Cbfb(fl/fl/Cre) primary osteoblasts, and Runx2 protein was less stable in Cbfb(fl/fl/Cre) osteoblasts than Cbfb(fl/fl) osteoblasts. These findings indicate that Cbfb is required for skeletal development by regulating chondrocyte differentiation and proliferation and osteoblast differentiation; that Cbfb plays an important role in the stabilization of Runx family proteins; and that Runx2 protein stability is less dependent on Cbfb in calvariae than in cartilaginous limb skeletons.
To clarify the cooperative roles of recurrently identified mutations and to establish a more precise risk classification system in acute myeloid leukemia (AML), we comprehensively analyzed mutations in 51 genes, as well as cytogenetics and 11 chimeric transcripts, in 197 adult patients with de novo AML who were registered in the Japan Adult Leukemia Study Group AML201 study. We identified a total of 505 mutations in 44 genes, while only five genes, FLT3, NPM1, CEBPA, DNMT3A and KIT, were mutated in more than 10% of the patients. Although several cooperative and exclusive mutation patterns were observed, the accumulated mutation number was higher in cytogenetically normal AML and lower in AML with RUNX1-RUNX1T1 and CBFB-MYH11, indicating a strong potential of these translocations for the initiation of AML. Furthermore, we evaluated the prognostic impacts of each sole mutation and the combinations of mutations and/or cytogenetics, and demonstrated that AML patients could be clearly stratified into five risk groups for overall survival by including the mutation status of DNMT3A, MLL-PTD and TP53 genes in the risk classification system of the European LeukemiaNet. These results indicate that the prognosis of AML could be stratified by the major mutation status in combination with cytogenetics.
The lack of molecular diagnosis in the field of cancer in Iraq has motivated us to perform a genetic analysis of pediatric acute myelogenous leukemia (AML), including class I and II aberrations. Peripheral blood or bone marrow cells were collected from 134 AML children aged ≤15 years. Flinders Technology Associates (FTA) filter paper cards were used to transfer dried blood samples from five Iraqi hospitals to Japan. DNA sequencing was performed to identify class I mutations. Nested RT-PCR was used to detect class II aberrations, except that MLL rearrangement was detected according to long distance inverse-PCR. NPM1 and FMS-like tyrosine kinase 3-internal tandem duplication (FLT3-ITD) mutations were analyzed by GeneScan using DNA template. Among 134 Iraqi pediatric AML samples, the most prevalent FAB subtype was M2 (33.6 %) followed by M3 (17.9 %). Class I mutations: 20 (14.9 %), 8 (6.0 %), and 8 (6.0 %) patients had FLT3-ITD, FLT3-TKD, and KIT mutations, respectively. Class II mutations: 24 (17.9 %), 19 (14.2 %), and 9 (6.7 %) children had PML-RARA, RUNX1-RUNX1T1, and CBFB-MYH11 transcripts, respectively. MLL rearrangements were detected in 25 (18.7 %) patients. NPM1 mutation was detected in seven (5.2 %) cases. Collectively, approximately 30 % of AML children were proved to carry favorable prognostic genetic abnormalities, whereas approximately 10 % had high FLT3-ITD allelic burden and needed a special treatment plan including allogeneic hematopoietic stem cell transplantation. Acute promyelocytic leukemia (APL) was frequent among Iraqi pediatric AML. It is likely that molecular diagnosis using FTA cards in underdeveloped countries could guide doctors towards an appropriate treatment strategy.
Inv(16)(p13q22) is associated with acute myeloid leukemia subtype M4Eo that is characterized by the presence of myelomonocytic blasts and atypical eosinophils. This chromosomal rearrangement results in the fusion of CBFB and MYH11 genes. CBF beta normally interacts with RUNX1 to form a transcriptionally active nuclear complex. The MYH11 gene encodes the smooth muscle myosin heavy chain. The CBF beta-SMMHC fusion protein is capable of binding to RUNX1 and form dimers and multimers through its myosin tail. Previous results from transgenic mouse models show that Cbfb-MYH11 is able to inhibit dominantly Runx1 function in hematopoiesis, and is a key player in the pathogenesis of leukemia. In recent years, molecular and cellular biological studies have led to the proposal of several models to explain the function of CBF beta-SMMHC. In this review, we will first focus our attention on the molecular mechanisms proposed in the recent publications. We will next examine recent gene expression profiling studies on inv(16) leukemia cells. Finally, we will describe a recent study from one of our labs on the identification of cooperating genes for leukemogenesis with CBFB-MYH11.
Core-binding factor beta (CBFbeta, also called polyomavirus enhancer binding protein 2beta (PEBP2B)) is associated with an inversion of chromosome 16 and is associated with acute myeloid leukemia in humans. CBFbeta forms a heterodimer with RUNX1 (runt-related transcription factor 1), which has a DNA binding domain homologous to the pair-rule protein runt in Drosophila melanogaster. Both RUNX1 and CBFbeta are essential for hematopoiesis. Haploinsufficiency of another runt-related protein, RUNX2 (also called CBFA1), causes cleidocranial dysplasia in humans and is essential in skeletal development by regulating osteoblast differentiation and chondrocyte maturation. Mice deficient in Cbfb (Cbfb(-/-)) die at midgestation, so the function of Cbfbeta in skeletal development has yet to be ascertained. To investigate this issue, we rescued hematopoiesis of Cbfb(-/-) mice by introducing Cbfb using the Gata1 promoter. The rescued Cbfb(-/-) mice recapitulated fetal liver hematopoiesis in erythroid and megakaryocytic lineages and survived until birth, but showed severely delayed bone formation. Although mesenchymal cells differentiated into immature osteoblasts, intramembranous bones were poorly formed. The maturation of chondrocytes into hypertrophic cells was markedly delayed, and no endochondral bones were formed. Electrophoretic mobility shift assays and reporter assays showed that Cbfbeta was necessary for the efficient DNA binding of Runx2 and for Runx2-dependent transcriptional activation. These findings indicate that Cbfbeta is required for the function of Runx2 in skeletal development.
The zebrafish fushi tarazu factor-1a (ff1a) is a transcription factor belonging to the NR5A subgroup of nuclear receptors. The NR5A receptors bind DNA as monomers and are considered to be orphans due to their ability to promote transcription of downstream genes without ligands. In zebrafish, four ff1 homologues (Ff1a, Ff1b, Ff1c, and Ff1d) have been identified so far. The gene coding for Ff1a is driven by two separate promoters, and give rise to four splice variants. Ff1a is expressed in the somites and pronephric ducts during somitogenesis and in the brain, liver, and mandibular arch during later embryonic stages. In adults the gene is highly expressed in gonads, liver, and intestine, but can be detected in most tissues. The broad variety of embryonic expression domains indicates several important developmental features. One of the mammalian fushi tarazu factor-1 genes, steroidogenic factor-1 (SF-1), is essential for the development of gonads and adrenals. SF-1 is together with Sox9, WT1, and GATA4 a positive transcriptional regulator of human anti-mullerian hormone (AMH) and thereby linked to the male sex-determining pathway. The zebrafish ff1a dual promoter contains several GATA binding sites and E-boxes, a site for DR4, XFD2, MyoD, Snail, HNF3, S8, and an HMG-box recognition site for Sox9. In a first attempt to dissect the ff1a promoter in vivo we have produced first generation transgenes in order to determine the correlation between the expression of the endogenous ff1a gene and the microinjected ff1a dual promoter coupled to the pEGFP reporter vector. Our results show that the microinjected constructs are expressed in the correct tissues.
The understanding of vertebrate development has greatly benefited from the study of gastrulation in the Xenopus embryo. Over the years, the molecular dissection of the Spemann organizer has proven to be a very fruitful source for gene discovery. Here, we report a comprehensive screen of gene expression in the Xenopus gastrula using cDNA macroarrays. Nylon filters containing more than 72000 cDNAs from a gastrula stage library were hybridized with differential probes from embryos in which organizer induction had been inhibited by reducing Nodal-related or maternal beta-Catenin signaling. Combining the changes in gene expression levels caused by these two major signaling pathways in a single graph identified both known and novel dorsoventral regulated genes. The most highly enriched organizer-specific genes were the secreted molecules chordin and Xnr-3, followed by the transmembrane protein paraxial protocadherin (PAPC). Ventral-specific abundant cDNAs included S10-40-H5, members of the Hyaluronan synthase family, Xvent-2 and XFD2/FoxI1. A differential probe of dorsal and ventral lips identified many more organizer-specific cDNAs than the screens inhibiting Nodal-related and beta-Catenin signaling, suggesting that additional, as yet uncharacterized signaling pathways, contribute to organizer formation. Finally, extension of this approach to the blastula preorganizer signaling center identified the transcription factor pintallavis/FoxA2 as a new preorganizer component.
DNA binding proteins of the winged helix family contain a conserved 110 amino acid region, the fork head/HNF-3 domain. Three members of the recently described XFD (Xenopus fork head domain related) multigene family in the frog Xenopus laevis that contain this DNA-binding domain have been studied. We determined the in vitro DNA recognition sequences by means of two independent methods: PCR supported site selection with degenerated deoxyoligonucleotides and affinity chromatography of genomic Xenopus DNA fragments. In contrast to a remarkable sequence divergence within their protein sequence of the fork head domains, all three proteins share a similar 7 bp DNA target motif. The protein-DNA interaction has been studied by means of DMS interference and hydroxyl radical footprinting. A region of 18 bp encompassing the 7 bp target motif is sufficient to confer binding and specificity. The specificity of binding could be attributed on the DNA level to residues located 5' to the 7 bp core region, and on the protein level most likely to a region within the first half of the fork head domain. The possible role of specific nucleotides within the target site in binding the protein is discussed in the context of the current crystal structure of the complex of this domain with DNA.
The aim of our study was 1) to define if the amplification of c-MYC, MLL and RUNX1 genes is related to the progressive changes of the karyotype in patients with AML and MDS with trisomy 8, 11 and 21 (+8, +11 and +21) in bone marrow and 2) can that amplification be accepted as part of the clonal evolution (CE). Karyotype analysis was performed in 179 patients with AML or MDS with the different chromosomal aberrations (CA) aged 16-81. The findings were distributed as follow: initiating balanced CA (n = 60), aneuploidia (n = 55), unbalanced CA (n = 64). Amplification of c-MYC, MLL and RUNX1 genes by means of fluorescence in situ hybridization (FISH) was found in 35% (7 out of 20) of AML and MDS patients with +8, +11 u +21 as single CA in their karyotype; in 63.6% of pts (7 out of 11)--with additional numerical or structural CA and in 75% (9 out of 12)--with complex karyotype. We assume that the amplification of the respective chromosomal regions in patients with +8, +11 and +21 is related to CE. Considering the amplification as a factor of CE, we established 3 patterns of karyotype development depending on the type of the initiating CA in it. Significant statistical differences were found between the three patterns regarding the karyotype distribution in the different stages of progression (p < 0.001).
Haematopoietic stem and progenitor cell (HSPC) transplant is a widely used treatment for life-threatening conditions such as leukaemia; however, the molecular mechanisms regulating HSPC engraftment of the recipient niche remain incompletely understood. Here we develop a competitive HSPC transplant method in adult zebrafish, using in vivo imaging as a non-invasive readout. We use this system to conduct a chemical screen, and identify epoxyeicosatrienoic acids (EETs) as a family of lipids that enhance HSPC engraftment. The pro-haematopoietic effects of EETs were conserved in the developing zebrafish embryo, where 11,12-EET promoted HSPC specification by activating a unique activator protein 1 (AP-1) and runx1 transcription program autonomous to the haemogenic endothelium. This effect required the activation of the phosphatidylinositol-3-OH kinase (PI(3)K) pathway, specifically PI(3)Kγ. In adult HSPCs, 11,12-EET induced transcriptional programs, including AP-1 activation, which modulate several cellular processes, such as migration, to promote engraftment. Furthermore, we demonstrate that the EET effects on enhancing HSPC homing and engraftment are conserved in mammals. Our study establishes a new method to explore the molecular mechanisms of HSPC engraftment, and discovers a previously unrecognized, evolutionarily conserved pathway regulating multiple haematopoietic generation and regeneration processes. EETs may have clinical application in marrow or cord blood transplantation.
Abnormalities of the RUNX1 gene in childhood B-acute lymphoblastic leukemia (B-ALL) are manifested by ETV6-RUNX1 or RUNX1 amplification. A detailed comparison between the two regarding clinicopathologic features with genetic analysis has not been performed previously. This parallel study assessed how different RUNX1 abnormalities affect the clinicopathology of B-ALL.
We compared clinicopathologic factors, including age, sex, WBC count, cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) involvement, immunophenotype, and blast proliferation rate between B-ALL with RUNX1 amplification (10 cases) and B-ALL with ETV6-RUNX1 translocation (67 cases) in childhood B-ALL.
CD7 was often expressed in RUNX1 amplification but not in ETV6-RUNX1 (44% vs 0%, P = .0001) and appeared to correlate with CSF involvement in the former group (3/4 [75%]). CD13 was often detected in ETV6-RUNX1 with additional RUNX1 gain (38%) with an even higher frequency in double ETV6-RUNX1 translocation (77%), but was not detected in RUNX1 amplification (0%, P < .05). Children with RUNX1 amplification were older and more often CSF positive, while those with ETV6-RUNX1 were younger, more frequently had hyperleukocytosis, and had higher blast proliferation rates.
RUNX1 copy numbers seem to be proportional to the age of B-ALL onset and the frequency of CSF involvement, while RUNX1 amplification vs translocation causes aberrant expression of CD7 and CD13, respectively.
B-lymphoblastic leukemia (B-ALL) with intrachromosomal amplification of chromosome 21 (iAMP21) is a relatively uncommon manifestation of acute leukemia and limited predominantly to the pediatric population. Case-specific information regarding flow cytometric, morphologic, and laboratory findings of this subtype of leukemia is currently lacking.
We searched the databases of three large institutions for lymphoblastic leukemia with iAMP21 from 2005 through 2012 and analyzed the clinicopathologic features.
We identified 17 cases with five or more RUNX1 signals on interphase nuclei, 14 of which were consistent with the Children's Oncology Group (COG) definition for iAMP21—namely, the presence of three or more RUNX1 signals on one marker chromosome. These cases showed a statistically significant lower peripheral WBC count and older age at diagnosis compared with all pediatric cases of B-ALL. We also identified three cases with increased RUNX1 signals scattered on multiple marker chromosomes that did not meet the COG definition of iAMP21 but showed similar 21q instability and older age at presentation.
Our findings not only demonstrate that B-ALL with iAMP21 is truly a distinct clinicopathologic entity but also suggest that a subset of cases of B-ALL with iAMP21 can show variable cytogenetic features.
Proper regulation of microbial-induced cytokines is critical to intestinal immune homeostasis. Acute stimulation of nucleotide-binding oligomerization domain 2 (NOD2), the Crohn's disease-associated sensor of bacterial peptidoglycan, induces cytokines. However, chronic NOD2 stimulation in macrophages decreases cytokines upon pattern recognition receptor (PRR) restimulation; cytokine attenuation to PRR stimulation is similarly observed in intestinal macrophages. The role for the transcriptional repressors Twist1 and Twist2 in regulating PRR-induced cytokine outcomes is poorly understood and has not been reported for NOD2. We found that Twist1 and Twist2 were required for optimal cytokine downregulation during acute and, particularly, chronic NOD2 stimulation of human macrophages. Consistently, Twist1 and Twist2 expression was increased after chronic NOD2 stimulation; this increased expression was IL-10 and TGF-β dependent. Although Twist1 and Twist2 did not coregulate each other's expression, they cooperated to enhance binding to cytokine promoters after chronic NOD2 stimulation. Moreover, Twist1 and Twist2 contributed to enhance expression and promoter binding of the proinflammatory inhibitor c-Maf and the transcriptional repressor Bmi1. Restoring c-Maf and Bmi1 expression in Twist-deficient macrophages restored NOD2-induced cytokine downregulation. Furthermore, with chronic NOD2 stimulation, Twist1 and Twist2 contributed to the decreased expression and cytokine promoter binding of the transcriptional activators activating transcription factor 4, C/EBPα, Runx1, and Runx2. Knockdown of these transcriptional activators in Twist-deficient macrophages restored cytokine downregulation after chronic NOD2 stimulation. Finally, NOD2 synergized with additional PRRs to increase Twist1 and Twist2 expression and Twist-dependent pathways. Therefore, after chronic NOD2 stimulation Twist1 and Twist2 coordinate the regulation of both transcriptional activators and repressors, thereby mediating optimal cytokine downregulation.
Missing self recognition of MHC class I molecules is mediated in murine species primarily through the stochastic expression of CD94/NKG2 and Ly49 receptors on NK cells. Previous studies have suggested that the stochastic expression of Ly49 receptors is achieved through the use of an alternate upstream promoter, designated Pro1, that is active only in immature NK cells and operates via the mutually exclusive binding of transcription initiation complexes to closely opposed forward and reverse TATA boxes, with forward transcription being transiently required to activate the downstream promoters, Pro2/Pro3, that are subsequently responsible for transcription in mature NK cells. In this study, we report that Pro1 transcripts are not restricted to immature NK cells but are also found in mature NK cells and T cells, and that Pro1 fragments display strong promoter activity in mature NK cell and T cell lines as well as in immature NK cells. However, the strength of promoter activity in vitro does not correlate well with Ly49 expression in vivo and forward promoter activity is generally weak or undetectable, suggesting that components outside of Pro1 are required for efficient forward transcription. Indeed, conserved sequences immediately upstream and downstream of the core Pro1 region were found to inhibit or enhance promoter activity. Most surprisingly, promoter activity does not require either the forward or reverse TATA boxes, but is instead dependent on residues in the largely invariant central region of Pro1. Importantly, Pro1 displays strong enhancer activity, suggesting that this may be its principal function in vivo.
To evaluate the efficiency of one-step multiplex RT-PCR for identifying four common fusion transcripts (TEL/AML1, E2A/PBX1, MLL/AF4 and BCR/ABL) in children with acute lymphoblastic leukemia (ALL).
Total RNA was extracted from bone marrow samples of 76 children who were newly diagnosed with ALL between January 2003 and December 2010. These RNAs were analyzed for TEL/AML1, E2A/PBX1, MLL/AF4 and BCR/ABL by one-step multiplex RT-PCR or common nested-multiplex PCR. The PCR products were confirmed by DNA sequencing.
TEL/AML1 was found in 12 cases (the length of products was 298 bp in 9 cases and 259 bp in 3 cases), E2A/PBX1 was found in 3 cases (the length of products was 373 bp), BCR/ABL was found in 1 case (the length of products was 2 124 bp), and MLL/AF4 was found in 7 cases (the length of products was 427 bp in 1 case and 673 bp in 6 cases) using one-step multiplex RT-PCR combined with DNA sequencing. The results were consistent with those using common nested-multiplex PCR.
One-step multiplex RT-PCR may be another alternative for detection of common fusion transcripts in children with ALL.
The generation of haematopoietic stem cells (HSCs) from human pluripotent stem cells (hPSCs) will depend on the accurate recapitulation of embryonic haematopoiesis. In the early embryo, HSCs develop from the haemogenic endothelium (HE) and are specified in a Notch-dependent manner through a process named endothelial-to-haematopoietic transition (EHT). As HE is associated with arteries, it is assumed that it represents a subpopulation of arterial vascular endothelium (VE). Here we demonstrate at a clonal level that hPSC-derived HE and VE represent separate lineages. HE is restricted to the CD34(+)CD73(-)CD184(-) fraction of day 8 embryoid bodies and it undergoes a NOTCH-dependent EHT to generate RUNX1C(+) cells with multilineage potential. Arterial and venous VE progenitors, in contrast, segregate to the CD34(+)CD73(med)CD184(+) and CD34(+)CD73(hi)CD184(-) fractions, respectively. Together, these findings identify HE as distinct from VE and provide a platform for defining the signalling pathways that regulate their specification to functional HSCs.
The activity of antagonizing transcription factors represents a mechanistic paradigm of bidirectional lineage-fate control during hematopoiesis. At the megakaryocytic/erythroid bifurcation, the cross-antagonism of krueppel-like factor 1 (KLF1) and friend leukemia integration 1 (FLI1) has such a decisive role. However, how this antagonism is resolved during lineage specification is poorly understood. We found that runt-related transcription factor 1 (RUNX1) inhibits erythroid differentiation of murine megakaryocytic/erythroid progenitors and primary human CD34(+) progenitor cells. We show that RUNX1 represses the erythroid gene expression program during megakaryocytic differentiation by epigenetic repression of the erythroid master regulator KLF1. RUNX1 binding to the KLF1 locus is increased during megakaryocytic differentiation and counterbalances the activating role of T-cell acute lymphocytic leukemia 1 (TAL1). We found that corepressor recruitment by RUNX1 contributes to a block of the KLF1-dependent erythroid gene expression program. Our data indicate that the repressive function of RUNX1 influences the balance between erythroid and megakaryocytic differentiation by shifting the balance between KLF1 and FLI1 in the direction of FLI1. Taken together, we show that RUNX1 is a key player within a network of transcription factors that represses the erythroid gene expression program.
Myeloid and lymphoid neoplasms with abnormalities of fibroblast growth factor receptor 1 gene (FGFR1) are a rare and aggressive disease group that harbors translocations of FGFR1 with at least 14 recognized partner genes. We report a case of a patient with a novel t(17;21)(p13;q22) with RUNX1 rearrangement and trilineage blasts.
A 29-year-old man with relapsed T-lymphoblastic lymphoma in the cervical nodes showed a myeloproliferative neoplasm in his bone marrow with three separate populations of immunophenotypically aberrant myeloid, T-lymphoid, and B-lymphoid blasts by flow cytometry. Cytogenetic and fluorescent in situ hybridization studies showed unique dual translocations of t(8;13)(p11.2;q12) and t(17;21)(p13;q22) with RUNX1 rearrangement.
The patient was initiated on a mitoxantrone, etoposide, and cytarabine chemotherapy regimen and died of complications of disease 1 month later.
To our knowledge, this is the first reported case of a myeloid and lymphoid neoplasm with abnormalities of FGFR1 with t(17;21)(p13;q22) and trilineage blasts.
Some ribonucleases (RNases) produce selective toxic effect on the cancer cells. The mechanism of this antitumor activity remains largely unclear. The subject of this review is the RNases interaction with cellular components, resulting in the induction of apoptosis of tumor cells. Cell surface structures, which are potential acceptors of the exogenous RNase are discussed: acidic lipids and glycoproteins, heparansulfate-containing proteoglycans, actin, and RNA-associated proteins. Cell membranes of normal and malignant cells differ according to the composition of these components, which largely determines the selectivity of RNases for the latter. Different types of RNA are examined as intracellular targets of the RNases activity, evidence is presented demonstrating the possibility of exogenous RNases intervening in the process of RNA interference. The role of potassium channels, NF-kappaB-dependent.signaling pathway and various caspases in apoptosis induced by exogenous RNases is discussed. Evidence is also presented showing that the sensitivity of cells to exogenous RNases is linked to the expression of certain oncogenes, namely RAS, KIT, AML1-ETO. It is suggested that discovering the details of the mechanisms of RNases cytotoxic effect in malignant cells susceptible to their activity, will in the future serve as a foundation to developing new tools of targeted anticancer therapy.
RUNX1 (Runt-related transcription factor 1) is indispensable for the generation of hemogenic endothelium. However, the regulation of RUNX1 during this developmental process is poorly understood. We investigated the role of the histone chaperone HIRA (histone cell cycle regulation-defective homolog A) from this perspective and report that HIRA significantly contributes toward the regulation of RUNX1 in the transition of differentiating mouse embryonic stem cells from hemogenic to hematopoietic stage. Direct interaction of HIRA and RUNX1 activates the downstream targets of RUNX1 implicated in generation of hematopoietic stem cells. At the molecular level, HIRA-mediated incorporation of histone H3.3 variant within the Runx1 +24 mouse conserved noncoding element is essential for the expression of Runx1 during endothelial to hematopoietic transition. An inactive chromatin at the intronic enhancer of Runx1 in absence of HIRA significantly repressed the transition of cells from hemogenic to hematopoietic fate. We expect that the HIRA-RUNX1 axis might open up a novel approach in understanding leukemogenesis in future.
Mammalian skin is innervated by diverse, unmyelinated C fibers that are associated with senses of pain, itch, temperature, or touch. A key developmental question is how this neuronal cell diversity is generated during development. We reported previously that the runt domain transcription factor Runx1 is required to coordinate the development of these unmyelinated cutaneous sensory neurons, including VGLUT3(+) low-threshold c-mechanoreceptors (CLTMs), MrgprD(+) polymodal nociceptors, MrgprA3(+) pruriceptors, MrgprB4(+) c-mechanoreceptors, and others. However, how these Runx1-dependent cutaneous sensory neurons are further segregated is poorly illustrated. Here, we find that the Runx1-dependent transcription factor gene Zfp521 is expressed in, and required for establishing molecular features that define, VGLUT3(+) CLTMs. Furthermore, Runx1 and Zfp521 form a classic incoherent feedforward loop (I-FFL) in controlling molecular identities that normally belong to MrgprD(+) neurons, with Runx1 and Zfp51 playing activator and repressor roles, respectively (in genetic terms). A knock-out of Zfp521 allows prospective VGLUT3 lineage neurons to acquire MrgprD(+) neuron identities. Furthermore, Runx1 might form other I-FFLs to regulate the expression of MrgprA3 and MrgprB4, a mechanism preventing these genes from being expressed in Runx1-persistent VGLUT3(+) and MrgprD(+) neurons. The evolvement of these I-FFLs provides an explanation for how modality-selective sensory subtypes are formed during development and may also have intriguing implications for sensory neuron evolution and sensory coding.
Runx1 is a transcription factor essential for definitive hematopoiesis, and genetic abnormalities in Runx1 cause leukemia. Runx1 is functionally promiscuous and acts as either an oncogene or tumor suppressor gene in certain epithelial cancers. Recent evidence suggests that Runx1 is an important factor in breast cancer, however, its role remains ambiguous. Here, we addressed whether Runx1 has a specific pathological role during breast cancer progression and show that Runx1 has an oncogenic function. We observed elevated Runx1 expression in a subset of human breast cancers. Furthermore, throughout the course of disease progression in a classical mouse model of breast cancer (i.e., the MMTV-PyMT transgenic model), Runx1 expression increases in the primary site (mammary gland) and is further upregulated in tumors and distal lung metastatic lesions. Ex vivo studies using tumor epithelial cells derived from these mice express significantly higher levels of Runx1 than normal mammary epithelial cells. The tumor cells exhibit increased rates of migration and invasion, indicative of an aggressive cancer phenotype. Inhibition of Runx1 expression using RNA interference significantly abrogates these cancer-relevant phenotypic characteristics. Importantly, our data establish that Runx1 contributes to murine mammary tumor development and malignancy and potentially represents a key disease-promoting and prognostic factor in human breast cancer progression and metastasis.
The CD69 type II C-type lectin is one of the earliest indicators of leukocyte activation acting in lymphocyte migration and cytokine secretion. CD69 expression in hematopoietic lineage undergoes rapid changes depending on the cell-lineage, the activation state or the localization of the cell where it is expressed, suggesting a complex and tightly controlled regulation. Here we provide new insights on the transcriptional regulation of CD69 gene in mammal species. Through in silico studies, we analyzed several regulatory features of the 4 upstream conserved non-coding sequences (CNS 1-4) previously described, confirming a major function of CNS2 in the transcriptional regulation of CD69. In addition, multiple transcription binding sites are identified in the CNS2 region by DNA cross-species conservation analysis. By functional approaches we defined a core region of 226bp located within CNS2 as the main enhancer element of CD69 transcription in the hematopoietic cells analyzed. By chromatin immunoprecipitation, binding of RUNX1 to the core-CNS2 was shown in a T cell line. In addition, we found an activating but not essential role of RUNX1 in CD69 gene transcription by site-directed mutagenesis and RNA silencing, probably through the interaction with this potent enhancer specifically in the hematopoietic lineage. In summary, in this study we contribute with new evidences to the landscape of the transcriptional regulation of the CD69 gene.
The adult blood system is established by hematopoietic stem cells (HSCs), which arise during development from an endothelial-to-hematopoietic transition of cells comprising the floor of the dorsal aorta. Expression of aortic runx1 has served as an early marker of HSC commitment in the zebrafish embryo, but recent studies have suggested that HSC specification begins during the convergence of posterior lateral plate mesoderm (PLM), well before aorta formation and runx1 transcription. Further understanding of the earliest stages of HSC specification necessitates an earlier marker of hemogenic endothelium. Studies in mice have suggested that GATA2 might function at early stages within hemogenic endothelium. Two orthologs of Gata2 exist in zebrafish: gata2a and gata2b. Here, we report that gata2b expression initiates during the convergence of PLM, becoming restricted to emerging HSCs. We observe Notch-dependent gata2b expression within the hemogenic subcompartment of the dorsal aorta that is in turn required to initiate runx1 expression. Our results indicate that Gata2b functions within hemogenic endothelium from an early stage, whereas Gata2a functions more broadly throughout the vascular system.
CCAAT/enhancer binding protein α (C/EBPα) dimerizes via its leucine zipper (LZ) domain to bind DNA via its basic region and activate transcription via N-terminal trans-activation domains. The activity of C/EBPα is modulated by several serine/threonine kinases and via sumoylation, its gene is activated by RUNX1 and additional transcription factors, its mRNA stability is modified by miRNAs, and its mRNA is subject to translation control that affects AUG selection. In addition to inducing differentiation, C/EBPα inhibits cell cycle progression and apoptosis. Within hematopoiesis, C/EBPα levels increase as long-term stem cells progress to granulocyte-monocyte progenitors (GMP). Absence of C/EBPα prevents GMP formation, and higher levels are required for granulopoiesis compared to monopoiesis. C/EBPα interacts with AP-1 proteins to bind hybrid DNA elements during monopoiesis, and induction of Gfi-1, C/EBPε, KLF5, and miR-223 by C/EBPα enables granulopoiesis. The CEBPA ORF is mutated in approximately 10 % of acute myeloid leukemias (AML), leading to expression of N-terminally truncated C/EBPαp30 and C-terminal, in-frame C/EBPαLZ variants, which inhibit C/EBPα activities but also play additional roles during myeloid transformation. RUNX1 mutation, CEBPA promoter methylation, Trib1 or Trib2-mediated C/EBPαp42 degradation, and signaling pathways leading to C/EBPα serine 21 phosphorylation reduce C/EBPα expression or activity in additional AML cases.
The differentiation from multipotent hematopoietic stem cells (HSC) to mature and functional blood cells requires the finely tuned regulation of gene expression at each stage of development. Specific transcription factors play a key role in this process as they modulate the expression of their target genes in an exquisitely lineage-specific manner. A large number of important transcriptional regulators have been identified which establish and maintain specific gene expression patterns during hematopoietic development. Hematopoiesis is therefore a paradigm for investigating how transcription factors function in mammalian cells, thanks also to the evolution of genome-wide and the next-generation sequencing technologies. In this review, we focus on the current knowledge of the biological and functional properties of the hematopoietic master regulator RUNX1 (also known as AML1, CBFA2, PEBP2aB) transcription factor and its main downstream target PU.1. We will outline their relationship in determining the fate of the myeloid lineage during normal stem cell development and under conditions when hematopoietic development is subverted by leukemic transformation.
Acute myeloid leukemia (AML) is the most common form of adult leukemia. The transcription factor fusion CBFβ-SMMHC (core binding factor β and the smooth-muscle myosin heavy chain), expressed in AML with the chromosome inversion inv(16)(p13q22), outcompetes wild-type CBFβ for binding to the transcription factor RUNX1, deregulates RUNX1 activity in hematopoiesis, and induces AML. Current inv(16) AML treatment with nonselective cytotoxic chemotherapy results in a good initial response but limited long-term survival. Here, we report the development of a protein-protein interaction inhibitor, AI-10-49, that selectively binds to CBFβ-SMMHC and disrupts its binding to RUNX1. AI-10-49 restores RUNX1 transcriptional activity, displays favorable pharmacokinetics, and delays leukemia progression in mice. Treatment of primary inv(16) AML patient blasts with AI-10-49 triggers selective cell death. These data suggest that direct inhibition of the oncogenic CBFβ-SMMHC fusion protein may be an effective therapeutic approach for inv(16) AML, and they provide support for transcription factor targeted therapy in other cancers.
Single nucleotide polymorphism (SNP) rs11671784 is in the loop of pre-miR-27a and the G/A variation can significantly decrease mature miR-27a expression. This study explored the role of miR-27a in chemo-sensitivity of bladder cancer and how rs11671784 G/A variation affects the sensitivity. Blood and tumor samples from 89 bladder cancer cases were analyzed. In-vitro study was performed to explore the mechanism of chemo-sensitivity and the downstream target of miR-27a by using bladder cancer cell lines. This study identified a causative relationship between rs11671784 G/A variation, lowered miR-27a expression, increased RUNX-1 expression and following weakened chemo-sensitivity. rs11671784 G allele has significantly stronger effect over A allele in promoting chemo-sensitivity in bladder cancer. miR-27a mediates chemotherapy at least partially through reducing P-gp expression and increasing apoptosis. In addition, RUNX-1 is a novel direct target of miR-27a, which is involved in its regulation of chemo-sensitivity in bladder cancer.
By searching the Expressed Sequence Tag (EST) data base, we identified partial cDNA sequences potentially encoding a novel human CC chemokine. We determined the entire cDNA sequence which encodes a highly basic polypeptide of 134 amino acids total with a putative signal peptide of 23 amino acids. The predicted mature protein of 111 amino acids has the four canonical cysteine residues and shows 21-33% identity to other human CC chemokines, but has a unique carboxyl-terminal extension of about 30 amino acids which contains two extra cysteine residues. The mRNA was expressed strongly in tissues such as the lymph nodes, Appendix, and spleen. The recombinant protein, which was produced by the baculovirus system and purified to homogeneity, was a highly efficient chemoattractant for certain human T cell lines and a highly potent one for freshly isolated peripheral blood lymphocytes and cultured normal T cells expanded by phytohemagglutinin and interleukin 2. Unlike most other CC chemokines, however, this novel chemokine was not chemotactic for monocytes or neutrophils, suggesting that it is specific for lymphocytes. From these results, we designated this novel CC chemokine as SLC from secondary lymphoid-tissue chemokine. SLC fused with the secreted form of alkaline phosphatase (SLC-SEAP) was used to characterize the SLC receptor. Binding of SLC-SEAP to freshly isolated lymphocytes was blocked by SLC (IC50, 0.12 nM) but not by any other CC chemokine so far tested, suggesting that resting lymphocytes express a class of receptors highly specific for SLC. By using somatic cell hybrids, radiation hybrids, and selected yeast and bacterial artificial chromosome clones, we mapped the SLC gene (SCYA21) at chromosome 9p13 and between chromosomal markers, D9S1978(WI-8765) and AFM326vd1, where the gene for another novel CC chemokine termed ELC from EBI1-ligand chemokine (SCYA19) also exists. Collectively, SLC is a novel CC chemokine specific for lymphocytes and, together with ELC, constitutes a new group of chemokines localized at chromosome 9p13.
Any vaginal product that alters the mucosal environment and impairs the immune barrier increases the risk of sexually transmitted infections, especially HIV infection, which thrives on mucosal damage and inflammation. The FDA-recommended rabbit vaginal irritation (RVI) model serves as a first line selection tool for vaginal products; however, for decades it has been limited to histopathology scoring, insufficient to select safe anti-HIV microbicides. In this study we incorporate to the RVI model a novel quantitative nuclease protection assay (qNPA) to quantify mRNA levels of 25 genes representing leukocyte differentiation markers, toll-like receptors (TLR), cytokines, chemokines, epithelial repair, microbicidal and vascular markers, by designing two multiplex arrays. Tissue sections were obtained from 36 rabbits (6 per treatment arm) after 14 daily applications of a placebo gel, saline, 4% nonoxynol-9 (N-9), and three combinations of the anti-HIV microbicides tenofovir (TFV) and UC781 in escalating concentrations (highest: 10% TFV+2.5%UC781). Results showed that increased expression levels of toll-like receptor (TLR)-4, interleukin (IL)-1β, CXCL8, epithelial membrane protein (EMP)-1 (P<0.05), and decreased levels of TLR2 (P<0.05), TLR3 and bactericidal permeability increasing protein (BPI) (P<0.001) were associated with cervicovaginal mucosal alteration (histopathology). Seven markers showed a significant linear trend predicting epithelial damage (up with CD4, IL-1β, CXCL8, CCL2, CCL21, EMP1 and down with BPI). Despite the low tissue damage RVI scores, the high-dose microbicide combination gel caused activation of HIV host cells (SLC and CD4) while N-9 caused proinflammatory gene upregulation (IL-8 and TLR4) suggesting a potential for increasing risk of HIV via different mechanisms depending on the chemical nature of the test product.
Secondary lymphoid tissue chemokine (SLC/CCL21), one of the CC chemokines, exerts potent antitumor immunity by co-localizing T cells and dendritic cells at the tumor site and is currently tested against human solid tumors. Here, we investigated whether the combination of recombinant adenovirus encoding murine CCL21 (Ad-mCCL21) with low-dose paclitaxel would improve therapeutic efficacy against murine cancer. Immunocompetent mice bearing B16-F10 melanoma or 4T1 breast carcinoma were treated with either Ad-mCCL21, paclitaxel, or both agents together. Our results showed that Ad-mCCL21 + low-dose paclitaxel more effectively reduced the growth of tumors as compared with either treatment alone and significantly prolonged survival time of the tumor-bearing animals. These antitumor effects of the combined therapy were linked to altered cytokine network at the tumor site, enhanced apoptosis of tumor cells, and decreased formation of new vessels in tumors. Importantly, the combined therapy elicited a strong therapeutic antitumor immunity, which could be partly abrogated by the depletion of CD4(+) or CD8(+) T lymphocytes. Collectively, these preclinical evaluations may provide a combined strategy for antitumor immunity and should be considered for testing in clinical trials.
Secondary lymphoid tissue chemokine (SLC/CCL21) and its receptor CCR7 have been implicated in lymph node metastasis, whereas the mechanism of which remains unclear. Epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT) plays an important role in invasion and migration of cancer cells. We presumed that CCL21/CCR7 axis activates EMT process to induce cancer cell invasion and metastasis. Firstly, the expressions of CCR7 and EMT markers were examined by immunohistochemical staining in the primary breast carcinoma tissues from 60 patients who underwent radical mastectomy. Then, we investigated whether CCL21/CCR7 induces EMT process during mediating cancer cell invasion or migration in vitro. By immunohistolochemistry, high expressions of CCR7, Slug and N-cadherin were seen in 60, 65, and 76.67 % of tumors, respectively, and significantly associated with lymph node metastases as well as clinical pathological stage. Furthermore, the CCR7 expression was significantly correlated to Slug and N-cadherin. In vitro, stimulating breast cancer cell lines 1428, MCF-7 and MDA-MB-231 with CCL21, the invasion and migration of tumor cells were promoted, and simultaneously, EMT phenotype of tumor cells was enhanced, including down-regulation of E-cadherin, up-regulation of Slug, Vimentin and N-cadherin at both protein and mRNA levels. Inversely, knockdown of CCR7 by shRNA suppressed tumor cell invasion, migration and EMT phenotype induced by CCL21. These results indicated that CCL21/CCR7 axis could activate EMT process during chemotaxis of breast carcinoma cells.
CC-chemokine receptor 7 (CCR7), a known lymph node homing receptor for immune cells, has been reported as a key molecule in lymph node metastasis. We hypothesized a clinicopathological correlation and functional causality between CCR7 expression and lymph node metastasis in patients with esophageal squamous cell carcinoma (ESCC).
We performed immunohistochemical analysis of 105 consecutive and 61 exclusive pathological T1 ESCC patients, followed by adhesion assay and in vivo experiment using a newly developed lymph node metastasis mouse model. The adhesive ability in response to CC-chemokine ligand 21/secondary lymphoid-tissue chemokine (CCL21/SLC) was assessed in the presence or absence of lymphatic endothelial cells and anti-CCR7 antibody. We established a heterotopic transplantation mouse model and analyzed lymph node metastasis by quantitative real-time RT-PCR.
Positive CCR7 expression in immunohistochemistory was detected in 28 (27%) of 105 consecutive patients and 17 (28%) of 61 T1 patients, which significantly correlated with lymph node metastasis (p = 0.037 and p = 0.040, respectively) and poor five-year survival (p = 0.013 and p = 0.012, respectively). Adhesion assay revealed an enhanced adhesive ability of CCR7-expressing cells in response to CCL21/SLC, in particular, in the presence of lymphatic endothelial cells (p = 0.005). In the mouse model, lymph nodes from mice transplanted with CCR7-expressing cells showed significantly higher DNA levels at 5 weeks (p = 0.019), indicating a high metastatic potential of CCR7-expressing cells.
These results demonstrated the significant clinicopathological relationship and functional causality between CCR7 expression and lymph node metastasis in ESCC patients.
Type 1 diabetes (T1D) is a T cell-mediated autoimmune disease characterized by the destruction of insulin-producing β cells in the pancreatic islets. The migration of T cells from blood vessels into pancreas is critical for the development of islet inflammation and β cell destruction in T1D. To define the roles of C-C chemokine receptor type 7 (CCR7) in recruitment of T cells into islets, we used laser capture microdissection to isolate tissue from inflamed islets of nonobese diabetic (NOD) mice and uninflamed islets of BALB/c and young NOD mice. RT-PCR analyses detected mRNAs for CCR7 and its chemokine ligands CCL19 (ELC; MIP-3β) and CCL21 (SLC) in captures from inflamed, but not from uninflamed, islets. Immunohistology studies revealed that high endothelial venules in inflamed islets co-express CCL21 protein and MAdCAM-1 (an adhesion molecule that recruits lymphocytes into islets). Desensitization of lymphocyte CCR7 blocked about 75 % of T cell migration from the bloodstream into inflamed islets, but had no effect on B cell migration into islets. These results indicate that CCR7 and its ligands are important in the recruitment of T cells into inflamed islets and thus in the pathogenesis of T1D.
The potential use of lymphoid chemokines to generate a dendritic cell (DC) cancer vaccine is not yet clear. We investigated the effect of lymphoid chemokines on DC function and on the production of effective cytotoxic T lymphocytes (CTLs) for application of cancer vaccine using monocyte-derived mature DCs (mDCs) prestimulated with lymphoid chemokines. mDCs exposed to a secondary lymphoid organ chemokine (SLC/CCL21) dramatically induced CTL response by increasing cytolytic activity without any significant alterations on expression of cell surface markers (e.g. CD80, CD83, CD86 and CCR7) or on the production of cytokines (e.g. IL-12p70, IL-10 and IL-23). Interestingly, mDCs prestimulated with CCL21 showed higher levels of CXCL10 (IP-10) production, but not the production of CCL22, compared with untreated mDCs. IP-10 treatment during CTL generation with DCs dramatically enhanced tumour-specific CTL response compared with untreated CTLs, and these enhanced CTL-inducing functions of CCL21-treated DCs were inhibited by anti-IP-10 treatment. Taken together, our data suggested an important role of the lymphoid-endothelium-associated chemokine, CCL21, on DCs in the induction of CTL responses.
Secondary lymphoid tissue chemokine (SLC) is a key CC chemokine for chemotaxis of immune cells and has been an attractive candidate for anti-tumor treatments. However, among the immune cells recruited by SLC to tumors, the CD25+ Foxp3+ regulatory T cells (Tregs) compromise the anti-tumor effects. In this study, we proposed the combination therapy of intratumoral co-administration of SLC and anti-CD25 monoclonal antibodies (mAbs). We hypothesized that the intratumoral injections of SLC and depletion of Tregs would have stronger inhibition effects on the progression of hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) in mice.
C57BL/6 mice were inoculated subcutaneously with the murine HCC cell line, and mice with visible tumors were treated intratumorally with SLC, SLC plus anti-CD25 mAbs or the control antibodies. The percentages of Tregs, effector CD8+ T cells and CD4+ T cells were checked in the tumors, lymph nodes, spleen and liver at regular intervals. The levels of intratumoral IL-12, IFN-γ, IL-10 and TGF-β1 were evaluated. The final anti-tumor effects were measured by the tumor volume and weight as well as the intratumoral activity of MMP2 and MMP9. Bone-marrow-derived dendritic cells were used to explore the mechanisms of maturation induced by SLC in vitro.
Our experiments showed the combination therapy significantly decreased the frequency of Tregs, and increased CD8+ T cells and CD4+ T cells at tumor sites. These alterations were accompanied by an increased level of IL-12 and IFN-γ, and decreased level of IL-10 and TGF-β1. Unexpectedly, we observed a significantly decreased percentage of Tregs, and increased CD8+ T cells and CD4+ T cells in the lymph nodes, spleen and liver after the combination therapy. The growth and invasiveness of HCC was also maximally inhibited in the combination therapy compared with the SLC alone. Furthermore, we confirmed SLC induced the maturation of DCs via NF-κB p65 and this maturation would benefit the combination therapy.
Our data demonstrated that intratumoral co-administration of SLC and anti-CD25 mAbs was an effective treatment for HCC, which was correlated with the altered tumor microenvironment and systemically optimized percentages of Tregs, CD8+ T cells and CD4+ T cells in peripheral immune organs.
To explore the anti-tumor effect and immune mechanism mediated by a new recombinant adeno-associated virus (rAAV) encoding secondary lymphoid tissue chemokine (SLC) mature peptide gene. AAV Helper-Free system was used for rAAV-SLC package. The anti-tumor effect of SLC was detected by bearing tumor established from Hepal-6 cells both in C57BL/6J and nude mice. Flow cytometry analysis and IHC for Tumor-infiltrating T cells and CD11c+DCs were also investigated to explore the immunological mechanism. rAAV-SLC was successfully packaged in AAV293 cells and transfected Hepal-6 tumor cells at high efficiency. The anti-tumor effect was demonstrated by less tumor weight and longer survival outcome. Coincident with the anti-tumor response, local elaboration of SLC within the tumor bed elicited a heavy infiltration of CD4+, CD8+T cells and CD11c+ dendritic cells into the tumor sites. More importantly, there was higher infiltration of Foxp3+ regulatory T cells (Tregs). Local elaboration of SLC mediated by rAAV-SLC has strong T cell mediated anti-tumor effect. The study also suggested that Tregs in the tumor microenvironment tampered the anti-tumor effect.
Lung cancer remains a challenging health problem with more than 1.1 million deaths worldwide annually. With current therapy, the long term survival for the majority of lung cancer patients remains low, thus new therapeutic strategies are needed. One such strategy would be to develop immune therapy for lung cancer. Immune approaches remain attractive because although surgery, chemotherapy, and radiotherapy alone or in combination produce response rates in all histological types of lung cancer, relapse is frequent. Strategies that harness the immune system to react against tumors can be integrated with existing forms of therapy for optimal responses toward this devastating disease. Both antigen presenting cell (APC) and T cell activities are reduced in the lung tumor microenvironment. In this review we discuss our experience with efforts to restore host APC and T cell activities in the lung cancer microenvironment by intratumoral administration of dendritic cells (DC) expressing the CCR7 receptor ligand CCL21 (secondary lymphoid chemokine, SLC). Based on the results demonstrating that CCL21 is an effective anti cancer agent in the pre-clinical lung tumor model systems, a phase I clinical trial was initiated using intratumoral injection of CCL21 gene modified autologous DC in lung cancer. Results from the trial thus far indicate tolerability, immune enhancement and tumor shrinkage via this approach.
Dendritic cells (DCs) are potent professional antigen-presenting cells (APCs) with the ability to prime naïve T cells, and play an important role in the initiation and regulation of immune responses. In this study, we constructed a recombinant adenovirus carrying the SLC gene (Ad-SLC), and detected the biological effects of Ad-SLC-modified DCs as an adjuvant for the initiation of gastric cancer immune responses. Human DCs were transfected with Ad-SLC and the recombinant adenovirus carrying the β-galactosidase gene, Ad-LacZ, respectively. Modified DCs were pulsed with the cell lysate antigen of SGC-7901 cells (a type of gastric cancer cell line) and co-cultured with autologous T cells. The T cells were harvested and incubated with SGC-7901 cells and the cytotoxic function of the T cells was detected. Based on the data, the expression of mature DC phenotypes CD83 and CCR7 was upregulated after transfection with Ad-SLC and the chemotaxis function of DCs was augmented after transfection with Ad-SLC. Moreover, the expression of RANTES in DCs was upregulated by Ad-SLC transfection, while expression levels of IL-12p70 and IL-10 were not significantly altered. When co-cultured with autologous T cells, DCs modified with the SLC gene and pulsed with SGC-7901 cell lysates significantly promoted the proliferation of autologous T cells and induced Th1 differentiation, and displayed a strong cytotoxicity to SGC-7901 cells. In conclusion, Ad-SLC promoted DC maturation, enhancing the ability of DCs for T-cell chemotaxis and T-cell stimulation, and induced specific anti-gastric cancer cellular immunity. Recombinant Ad-SLC-modified DCs may be used as an adjuvant to induce an effective anti-gastric cancer immune response.
Chemokines are a family of small, secreted proteins that function in leukocyte and tumor cell trafficking and recruiting. CC chemokine ligand 21 (CCL21)/secondary lymphoid chemokine (SLC) belongs to the inflammatory subgroup of chemokines and is expressed by stromal cells in the T-cell-rich zones of peripheral lymph nodes, afferent lymphatic endothelial cells and high endothelial venules. CCR7 (both in human and mouse) and CXCR3 (in mouse) are expressed by the most potent antigen-presenting cells (dendritic cells), naïve/central memory, and effector T cells, respectively. Inflammation in the skin can induce expression of CCL21 which is subsequently drained into loco-regional lymph nodes responsible for co-localization of antigen-presenting cells and T lymphocytes, a prerequisite for induction of adaptive immune responses. Here, skin functions as a remote control for induction of targeted cell migration in vivo. This chapter describes Gene Gun administration of plasmid DNA expressing functionally active CCL21 (as an example of a chemokine) into the skin in mice and subsequent functional evaluation of the transgene expression in vivo.
L-selectin functions as an important adhesion molecule that mediates tethering and rolling of lymphocytes by binding to high endothelial venule (HEV)-expressed ligands during recirculation. Subsequent lymphocyte arrest and transmigration require activation through binding of HEV-decorated homeostatic chemokines such as secondary lymphoid tissue chemokine (SLC; CCL21) to its counterreceptor, CCR7. Importantly, L-selectin also functions as a signaling molecule. In this study, signaling induced by ligation of L-selectin using mAb or endothelial cell-expressed ligand significantly enhanced the chemotaxis of murine T cells and B cells to SLC but not to other homeostatic chemokines. Consistent with the expression levels of L-selectin in different lymphocyte subsets, L-selectin-mediated enhancement of chemotaxis to SLC was observed for all naive lymphocytes and effector/memory CD8(+) T cells, whereas only a subpopulation of effector/memory CD4(+) T cells responded. During in vivo mesenteric lymph node migration assays, the absence of L-selectin on lymphocytes significantly attenuated both their ability to migrate out of the HEV and their chemotaxis away from the vessel wall. Notably, ligation of L-selectin and/or CCR7 did not result in increased CCR7 expression levels, internalization, or re-expression. Pharmacologic inhibitor studies showed that L-selectin-mediated enhanced chemotaxis to SLC required intact intracellular kinase function. Furthermore, treatment of lymphocytes with the spleen tyrosine kinase family inhibitor piceatannol reduced their ability to migrate across the HEV in peripheral lymph nodes. Therefore, these results suggest that "cross-talk" in the signaling pathways initiated by L-selectin and CCR7 provides a novel mechanism for functional synergy between these two molecules during lymphocyte migration.
Secondary lymphoid tissue chemokine (SLC), which is expressed in T cell zones of secondary lymphoid organs, including the spleen and lymph nodes, strongly recruits both T lymphocytes and mature dendritic cells. As appropriate interaction of tumor-specific T cells and mature dendritic cells, equipped with tumor antigens, is a prerequisite for effective T cell immunity against established tumors, we mobilized lymphocytes and dendritic cells to tumor sites by intratumoral injection of secondary lymphoid tissue chemokine-Fc (SLC-Fc) fusion protein using the B16F10 murine melanoma model. Activation of dendritic cells, another prerequisite for the effective activation of naïve tumor-specific T cells, was achieved by the addition of immunostimulatory cytosine-phosphorothioate-guanine oligodeoxynucleotide (CpG-ODN) into the tumor site. Intratumoral administration of SLC-Fc or CpG-ODN revealed antitumor effects against B16F10 murine melanoma grown in the subcutaneous space. Co-treatment of SLC-Fc and CpG-ODN displayed synergistic effects in reducing the tumor size. The synergistic antitumor effect in co-treatment group was correlated with the synergistic/additive increase in the infiltration of CD4(+) T cells and CD11c(+) dendritic cells in the tumor mass compared to the single treatment groups. These results suggest that the combined use of chemokines and adjuvant molecules may be a possible strategy in clinical tumor immunotherapy.
Secondary lymphoid-tissue chemokine (SLC/CCL21) is a CC chemokine that is constitutively expressed in various lymphoid tissues and binds to chemokine receptor CCR7 on mature dendritic cells (DCs) and distinct T-and B-cell sub-populations. In vivo, CCL21 regulates the encounters between DC and T cells and thus is a key regulator of adaptive immune responses. We asked whether CCL21 is able to augment immunogenicity of a DNA-based vaccine against Her2/neu in a Balb/c mouse model with syngeneic Her2/neu+ tumor cells (D2F2/E2). Mice were vaccinated intramuscularly with plasmid DNA (pDNA) on day 1 and boosted on day 15; tumor challenge was performed subcutaneously on day 25. Coexpression of CCL21 and Her-2/neu resulted in induction of a TH1-polarized immune response and substantial improvement of the protective effect of the DNA vaccine. Coexpression of tumor antigen pDNA(Her2/neu) with both pDNA(GM-CSF) and pDNA(CCL21) as adjuvants led to further improvement of protection by the vaccine (70% tumor-free mice on day 35 vs 40% with either adjuvant alone vs 5-10% with tumor antigen alone). Our results show that CCL21 is a potent adjuvant for DNA vaccination, particularly in combination with granulocyte-macrophage colony-stimulating factor (GM-CSF). Clinical use of a pDNA(Her2/neu/CCL21/GM-CSF) vaccine might be particularly promising in minimal residual Her2/neu+ breast cancer.
Dendritic cell (DC)-based cancer immunotherapy requires an immunogenic tumor associated antigen (TAA) and an effective strategy for its presentation to lymphocytes. Here, we explored whether transduction of DCs with lentiviruses (LVs) expressing a fusion protein of secondary lymphoid tissue chemokine (SLC) and mucin 1 (MUC1) could stimulate antigen-specific cytotoxic T cells (CTLs) to human cancer cells in vitro.
HLA-A2+ peripheral blood monocyte-derived DCs were transduced with recombinant lentiviruses LV at different multiplicities of infection (MOI), and MUC1, SLC or SLC-MUC1 mRNA and protein were detected by RT-PCR and Western blotting, respectively. Transduction efficiencies and phenotypes of DCs were evaluated by flow cytometry. Induction of T lymphocyte proliferation by DCs was examined with a Cell Count Kit-8 (CCK-8). CTL activities against tumor cells were analyzed by lactate dehydrogenase (LDH) cytotoxicity and enzyme-linked immunospot (ELISPOT) assays.
Stable expression of MUC1, SLC and SLC-MUC1 was obtained in DCs transduced with recombinant LVs, and the transduction efficiencies were dose-dependent. Transduction with LVs did not appreciably change the DC phenotype. CTL induced by LV MUC1 DCs potently and specifically lysed the HLA-A2+, MUC1+colon cancer cell line HCT-116. Moreover, this cytolytic activity against HCT-116 was enhanced with CTL stimulated by LV SLC-MUC1 DCs.
DCs transduced with MUC1 could induce effective cytolytic activity against tumor cells in an antigen-specific and HLA-restricted fashion in vitro, and SLC promoted MUC1-specific anti-tumor activity. The transduction of DCs with LV SLC- MUC1 may be a promising strategy in DC-based cancer immunotherapy.
Natural killer (NK) cells represent a major subpopulation of lymphocytes. These cells have effector functions as they recognize and kill transformed cells as well as microbially infected cells. In addition, alloreactive NK cells have been successfully used to treat patients with acute myeloid leukemia and other hematological malignancies. NK cells are also endowed with immunoregulatory functions since they secrete cytokines such as IFN-γ, which favor the development of T helper 1 (Th1) cells, and chemokines such as CCL3/MIP-1α and CCL4/MIP-1β, which recruit various inflammatory cells into sites of inflammation. In human blood, NK cells are divided into CD56(bright) CD16(dim) and CD56(dim) CD16(bright) subsets. These subsets have different phenotypic expression and may have different functions; the former subset is more immunoregulatory and the latter is more cytolytic. The CD56(bright)CD16(dim) NK cells home into tissues such as the peripheral lymph nodes (LNs) under physiological conditions because they express the LN homing receptor CCR7 and they respond to CCL19/MIP-3β and CCL21/SLC chemokines. They also distribute into adenoid tissues or decidual uterus following the CXCR3/CXCL10 or CXCR4/CXCL12 axis. On the other hand, both NK cell subsets migrate into inflammatory sites, with more CD56(dim)CD16(bright) NK cells distributing into inflamed liver and lungs. CCR5/CCL5 axis plays an important role in the accumulation of NK cells in virally infected sites as well as during parasitic infections. CD56(bright)CD16(dim) cells also migrate into autoimmune sites such as inflamed synovial fluids in patients having rheumatoid arthritis facilitated by the CCR5/CCL3/CCL4/CCL5 axis, whereas they distribute into inflamed brains aided by the CX₃CR1/CX₃CL1 axis. On the other hand, CD56(dim)CD16(bright) NK cells accumulate in the liver of patients with primary biliary disease aided by the CXCR1/CXCL8 axis. However, the types of chemokines that contribute to their accumulation in target organs during graft vs. host (GvH) disease are not known. Further, chemokines activate NK cells to become highly cytolytic cells known as CC chemokine-activated killer (CHAK) cells that kill tumor cells. In summary, chemokines whether secreted in an autocrine or paracrine fashion regulate various biological functions of NK cells. Depending on the tissue and the chemokine secreted, NK cells may ameliorate the disease such as their roles in combating tumors or virally infected cells, and their therapeutic potentials in treating leukemias and other hematological malignancies, as well as reducing the incidence of GvH disease. In contrast, they may exacerbate the disease by damaging the affected tissues through direct cytotoxicity or by the release of multiple inflammatory cytokines and chemokines. Examples are their deleterious roles in autoimmune diseases such as rheumatoid arthritis and primary biliary cirrhosis.
The aim of this study was to investigate whether dendritic cells (DCs) transfected with human secondary lymphoid-tissue chemokine (hSLC) and human interleukin-2 (hIL-2) genes are capable of improving DC's proliferation and to produce a marked antitumor effect in vitro combined with T-lymphocyte (TC).
SLC gene primer was designed based on the corresponding gene sequence in GenBank. The Kpn I site was introduced into the upstream of the primer and Xho I site into the downstream. The SLC gene was amplified with the template of pET32a(+)-SLC by polymerase chain reaction. SLC was cloned into pBudCE4.1/IL-2 (TRAIL was cut from pBudCE4.1/TRAIL- IL-2 before) to construct recombinant plasmid pBudCE4.1/SLC-IL-2(PSI). DCs were transfected with pBudCE4.1/SLC-IL-2 by gene electric transfection. Protein expression was determined with Western blot and enzyme-linked immunosorbent assays. Cytotoxicity of TC and DC against the human bladder tumor cell were examined by chromium release assay. Flow cytometric analyses were performed to determine the apoptosis of tumor cells and the percentage of Treg.
A high level of expression of SLC and IL-2 was observed in DCs transfected with SLC and IL-2 genes. The mean production of IL-2 was 19.8 +/- 2.5, 511.10 +/- 52.36, and 541.3 +/- 62.04 ng/10(6) cells/24 hours in the DC/vector, DC/IL-2, and DC/SLC-IL-2, respectively. The mean SLC production was 29.8 +/- 4.43, 506.10 +/- 42.36, and 567.34 +/- 52.05 ngs/10(6)cells/24 hours in the DC/ vector, DC/SLC, and DC/SLC-IL-2, respectively. Cytotoxicity to bladder cancer cells was increased. The mean cytotoxicity (the effector/target ratio, 40:1) of TC-DC/parental, TC-DC/IL-2, TC-DC/SLC, and TC-DC/SLC-IL-2(TDSI) to the human bladder cancer cells was 32.1 +/- 5.5%, 63.5 +/- 6.6%, 78.1 +/- 9.63%, respectively. The apoptotsis rate of bladder cancer cells treated with TDSI was 18.6% by flow cytometry. Treg cells' percentage was very small in the DC medium.
SLC and IL-2 were produced by autocrine in DCs transfected with SLC and IL-2 genes. DC/SLC-IL-2 can promote DC proliferation, while TC-DC/SLC-IL-2 and TC-DC/SLC could strongly enhance significant cytotoxicity against bladder cancer cell that was induced by the coculture of DCs (transfected with SLC and IL-2) and TC.
Based on leads from our recent animal studies, we are embarking on a series of new clinical trials to evaluate potential improvements in dendritic cell (DC)-based vaccines for melanoma and pancreatic cancer. The first new strategy involves the use of a powerful chemokine (denoted secondary lymphoid tissue chemokine; SLC/CCL-21), which can both create functioning lymph node-like structures at sites of vaccination with tumor-loaded DCs and dramatically enhance vaccine efficacy in animal tumor models. Using this strategy, we are embarking on a clinical trial in melanoma patients with the intent to create functioning, ectopic, lymph node-like structures to enhance host antitumor immunity. The second strategy, in the setting of pancreatic cancer, involves a gene therapy and immunotherapy combination of a locally administered tumor necrosis factor-alpha gene vector followed by radiation (to induce tumor apoptosis/necrosis) and intratumorally administered monocyte-derived DCs (to uptake and present antigens from dying tumor cells to elicit potent, systemic, antitumor immunity).
To explore the impact of secondary lymphoid tissue chemokine (SLC) on lymphocyte migration and the significance thereof in the pathogenesis of ulcerative colitis (UC).
Sixty SD rats were randomly divided into 3 equal groups: model group undergoing dripping of 40% acetone solution of dinitro-chlorobenzene (DNCB) on the back for 2 weeks and then enema of 6% DNCB acetone solution so as to establish models of UC, and then intravenous injection of normal saline (NS) for 5 days; SLC antibody intervention group undergoing intravenous injection of SLC antibody 15 microg x ml(-1) x kg(-1) immediately after the establishing of model; and control group undergoing enema of NS nly and then intravenous injection of NS for 5 days. Six days after the establishing of model venous blood samples were collected from the portal veins of the 3 groups. Lymphocytes were isolated and cultured. RT-PCR was used to detect the mRNA expression of the SLC receptor CCR7. Boyden chamber system was used to examine the migration ability of the lymphocytes exposed to SLC of 20, 40, 60, 80, and 100 ng/ml respectively. ELISA was used to detect the expression of interleukin (IL)-10 and interferon (IFN)-gamma in the supernatants of the lymphocytes of different groups.
RT-PCR showed that the CCR7 mRNA expression level of the model group was (0.792 +/- 0.108), significantly higher than that of the intervention group (0.386 +/- 0.115, P = 0.0429), and the CCR7 mRNA expression levels of these 2 groups were both significantly higher than that of the control group (0.106 +/- 0.029, both P < 0.01). SLC dose-dependently promoted the migration ability of the lymphocytes, but there existed a saturation phenomenon. Exposed to 80 ng/ml SLC the migration level of the lymphocytes of the model group peaked to (85.9 +/- 16.0), 3.7 times as high as that of the control group (20.5 +/- 1.8, P < 0.01), and the migration level of the lymphocytes of the intervention group was 38.2 +/- 6.3, significantly higher than that of the control group too (P < 0.05). SLC enhanced the expression of IFN-gamma of the lymphocytes of the model group, while reduced the IL-10 level, and both effects peaked at the concentration of 80 ng/ml (P = 0.042, P = 0.036).
SLC promotes the lymphocyte migration and boosts the differentiation of lymphocytes, thus participating in the pathogenesis of UC.
To investigate the effect of secondary lymphoid tissue chemokine (SLC) on experimental colon lesions in rats with ulcerative colitis.
Sixty Sprague-Dawley rats were randomly divided into control group, model group and SLC intervention group. Colonic mucosal lesions of different groups were observed with HE staining for inflammation and lymphocyte homing situation. Cytokine IL-2 and IL-6 levels were measured by ABC-ELISA. Semi-quantitative RT-PCR was used to examine the colonic SLC expression.
Intestinal inflammation score and colonic cytokine levels were significantly different among three groups (P<0.05, P<0.01). Abnormal lymphocyte homing phenomenon under colonic mucosa was found in the model group and the intervention group. SLC mRNA expression of the model and intervention groups increased significantly compared with the control group (0.846+/-0.047, 0.768+/-0.135 vs 0.312+/-0.112, P<0.01). However, there was no significant difference between model group and intervention group.
SLC may play an important role in experimental colonic mucosal inflammation in rats with ulcerative colitis. Blockade of SLC may be one of effective ways in reducing colonic mucosal inflammation.
The stem-cell marker CD93 (AA4.1/C1qRp) has been described as a potential complement C1q-receptor. Its exact molecular function, however, remains unknown. By using global expression profiling we showed that CD93-mRNA is highly induced after transient focal cerebral ischemia. CD93 protein is upregulated in endothelial cells, but also in selected macrophages and microglia. To elucidate the potential functional role of CD93 in postischemic brain damage, we used mice with a targeted deletion of the CD93 gene. After 30 min of occlusion of the middle cerebral artery and 3 d of reperfusion these mice displayed increased leukocyte infiltration into the brain, increased edema, and significantly larger infarct volumes (60.8 +/- 52.2 versus 23.9 +/- 16.6 mm(3)) when compared with wild-type (WT) mice. When the MCA was occluded for 60 min, after 2 d of reperfusion the CD93 knockout mice still showed more leukocytes in the brain, but the infarct volumes were not different from those seen in WT animals. To further explore CD93-dependent signaling pathways, we determined global transcription profiles and compared CD93-deficient and WT mice at various time points after induction of focal cerebral ischemia. We found a highly significant upregulation of the chemokine CCL21/Exodus-2 in untreated and treated CD93-deficient mice at all time points. Induction of CCL21 mRNA and protein was confirmed by PCR and immunohistochemistry. CCL21, which was formerly shown to be released by damaged neurons and to activate microglia, contributes to neurodegeneration. Thus, we speculate that CD93-neuroprotection is mediated via suppression of the neuroinflammatory response through downregulation of CCL21.
The approximately 50 known chemokines are classified in distinct subfamilies: CXC, CC, CX3C, and C. Although the signaling of chemokines often is promiscuous, signaling events between members of these distinct chemokine classes are hardly observed. The only known exception so far is the murine CC chemokine ligand (CCL)21 (secondary lymphoid tissue chemokine, Exodus-2, 6Ckine), which binds and activates the murine CXC chemokine receptor CXCR3. However, this exception has not been found in humans. In this study, we provide evidence that human CCL21 is a functional ligand for endogenously expressed CXCR3 in human adult microglia. In absence of CCR7 expression, CCL21 induced chemotaxis of human microglia with efficiency similar to the CXCR3 ligands CXC chemokine ligand 9 (monokine induced by IFN-gamma) and CXC chemokine ligand 10 (IFN-gamma-inducible protein-10). Because human CCL21 did not show any effects in CXCR3-transfected HEK293 cells, it is indicated that CXCR3 signaling depends on the cellular background in which the CXCR3 is expressed.
Secondary lymphoid organ chemokines have been implicated in chronic inflammation. Their expression in the central nervous system (CNS) has not been studied. Here, levels of secondary lymphoid organ chemokines CCL19 (Exodus-3, MIP-3beta), CCL21 (Exodus-2, 6Ckine, SLC) and CXCL12 (SDF-1alpha) were analysed by ELISA in cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) and plasma from patients with multiple sclerosis (MS); acute optic neuritis (ON) with oligoclonal IgG in the CSF (i.e., first bout of MS); acute ON without oligoclonal IgG (non-MS-type ON); other inflammatory neurological diseases (OIND); and non-inflammatory neurological diseases (NIND). NIND CSF contained CCL19 and CXCL12, while CCL21 was not detected. Intrathecal production of CCL19 and CCL21 was elevated in MS, MS-type ON, and OIND, but not in non-MS-type ON. In MS, CSF levels of CCL19 weakly correlated with CSF cell counts. Intrathecal production of CXCL12 was elevated only in OIND. The role of elevated CCL19 and CCL21 in MS could be retention of mature dendritic cells (DC) in the CNS, recruitment of nai;ve T cells and activated B cells, as well as de novo formation of secondary lymphoid structures in MS plaques.
The signals that mediate T-cell infiltration during T-cell autoimmune diseases are poorly understood. The chemokine CCL21 (originally isolated by us and others as Exodus-2/6Ckine/SLC/TCA4) is highly potent and highly specific for stimulating T-cell migration. However, it is thought to be expressed only in secondary lymphoid organs, directing naive T cells to areas of antigen presentation. It is not thought to play a role in T-cell effector function during a normal immune response. In this study we tested the expression of T-cell chemokines and their receptors during T-cell autoimmune infiltrative skin diseases. By using immunohistology it was found that the expression of CCL21 but not CCL19 or 20 was highly induced in endothelial cells of T-cell autoimmune diseases. The receptor for CCL21, CCR7, was also found to be highly expressed on the infiltrating T cells, most of which expressed the memory CD45Ro phenotype. These data imply that the usual loss of CCL21 responsiveness in the normal development of memory T-cell effector function does not hold for autoimmune skin diseases.
Chemokines are a family of small proteins that regulate leukocyte infiltration into inflamed tissue and play key roles in the pathogenesis of many diseases. Some chemokines can also reversibly inhibit the proliferation of hematopoietic progenitors. We have previously found that the chemokine CCL21 (Exodus-2/SLC/6Ckine/TCA4) is a potent inhibitor of the proliferation of normal hematopoietic progenitors. In this study we sought to determine whether this inhibition of proliferation could be therapeutically exploited by protecting normal marrow progenitors from the cytotoxicity of the S phase-active chemotherapeutic agent Ara-C.
Untreated and CCL21-pretreated mice were given doses of Ara-C that are toxic to marrow myeloid progenitors. The recovery of these myeloid progenitors was analyzed by colony formation assays.
It was found that pretreatment with small doses of CCL21 prevented the death of normal murine marrow progenitors from the toxic effects of Ara-C.
The chemokine CCL21 may be able to prevent Ara-C myelosuppression during acute leukemia induction chemotherapy, and thereby decrease morbidity and mortality of such therapy, and shorten hospital stays.
The chemokine CCL21, also known as Exodus-2/6-Ckine/secondary lymphoid-tissue chemokine/T cell activator protein-4, is the most potent stimulator of T cell migration and adhesion yet described. Endothelial heparin-like glycosaminoglycans (GAGs) are thought to present chemokines at sites of inflammation, maintaining a local concentration gradient to which leukocytes can respond. In contrast, this study found that GAGs markedly inhibit the ability of CCL21 to stimulate T cell adhesion and chemotaxis. Enzymes, such as heparinase, that split GAGs into component-sulfated saccharides abrogate this inhibition, suggesting a mechanism for local tissue regulation of CCL21 function. Low-molecular-weight heparins also strongly inhibit CCL21 adhesion and chemotaxis. Therefore, low-molecular-weight heparins may be effective therapeutic agents in decreasing the pathology of T cell-infiltrative autoimmune diseases by targeting the CCL21 regulation of T cell infiltration.
A defined and balanced immunomodulatory response is crucial for the protection of mucosal surfaces being in contact with pathogenic microorganisms. This study examined the local host response mechanisms of epithelial cells in experimental Candida albicans, C. tropicalis, and C. glabrata infections by measuring the expression of cytokines at the mRNA and protein level. During the course of infection with active but not with heat-killed C. albicans stimulation of the gene expression levels for interleukin-1alpha, interleukin-1beta, tumor necrosis factor, Exodus-2, P-selectin ligand, granulocyte-monocyte colony-stimulating factor, and interleukin-8 was observed by standard and quantitative reverse transcription-polymerase chain reaction. This cytokine pattern may favor a chemotactic and a T helper 1 response. Initial moderate or weak upregulation of these cytokine genes by reverse transcription-polymerase chain reaction was also observed in epithelial infection with the less virulent species C. tropicalis and C. glabrata. Heat-killed C. albicans failed to induce an epithelial immune response. At the protein level, expression of interleukin-8 protein was strongly enhanced during the course of C. albicans infection, whereas lower levels were seen with C. tropicalis and C. glabrata. The different expression patterns of cytokines were associated with differences in virulence of the Candida strains. This study's data, therefore, show a correlation between the virulence potential of pathogenic fungi, possibly mediated by specific virulence factors (such as proteinases), and the secretion of epithelial cytokines and chemokines, which may initiate in vivo a protective T helper 1 immunologic response and contribute to the recruitment of activated leukocytes and lymphocytes to the site of mucosal infection.
Chemokines are a large family of cytokines that direct normal leukocyte migration. They also have been implicated in leukocyte development and in the pathogenesis of many diseases. The CC chemokine CCL21, also known as Exodus-2, SLC, 6Ckine, and TCA4 induces both the adhesion and migration of human T cells. CCL21 is hypothesized to regulate the trafficking of T cells through secondary lymphoid tissues. To test this hypothesis, a transgenic mouse model was generated that placed the expression of mouse CCL21 (mCCL21) under the control of the T cell-specific lck promoter to abrogate the concentration gradient to which T cells normally respond. Overexpression of mCCL21 in T cells resulted in defects in CCL21- and CCL19-induced T-cell chemotaxis, node T-cell subpopulations, and lymph node architecture. The regulation of T-cell trafficking in secondary lymphoid tissues by CCL21 is therefore a tightly regulated system that can be altered by changes in the level of environmental CCL21 protein.
Secondary lymphoid tissue chemokine (SLC, also referred to as Exodus 2 or 6Ckine) is a recently identified high endothelial-derived CC chemokine. The ability of SLC to chemoattract both Th1 lymphocytes and dendritic cells formed the rationale to evaluate this chemokine in cancer immunotherapy. Intratumoral injection of recombinant SLC evidenced potent antitumor responses and led to complete tumor eradication in 40% of treated mice. SLC-mediated antitumor responses were lymphocyte dependent as evidenced by the fact that this therapy did not alter tumor growth in SCID mice. Studies performed in CD4 and CD8 knockout mice also revealed a requirement for both CD4 and CD8 lymphocyte subsets for SLC-mediated tumor regression. In immunocompetent mice, intratumoral SLC injection led to a significant increase in CD4 and CD8 T lymphocytes and dendritic cells, infiltrating both the tumor and the draining lymph nodes. These cell infiltrates were accompanied by the enhanced elaboration of Th1 cytokines and chemokines monokine induced by IFN-gamma and IFN-gamma-inducible protein 10 but a concomitant decrease in immunosuppressive cytokines at the tumor site. In response to irradiated autologous tumor, splenic and lymph node-derived cells from SLC-treated tumor-bearing mice secreted significantly more IFN-gamma, GM-CSF, and IL-12 and reduced levels of IL-10 than did diluent-treated tumor-bearing mice. After stimulation with irradiated autologous tumor, lymph node-derived lymphocytes from SLC-treated tumor-bearing mice demonstrated enhanced cytolytic capacity, suggesting the generation of systemic immune responses. These findings provide a strong rationale for further evaluation of SLC in tumor immunity and its use in cancer immunotherapy.
Natural killer (NK) cells play an important role in innate and adaptive immune responses to obligate intracellular pathogens. Nevertheless, the regulation of NK cell trafficking and migration to inflammatory sites is poorly understood. Exodus-1/MIP-3alpha/LARC, Exodus-2/6Ckine/SLC, and Exodus-3/MIP-3beta/ELC/CKbeta-11 are CC chemokines that share a unique aspartate-cysteine-cysteine-leucine motif near their amino terminus and preferentially stimulate the migration of T lymphocytes. The effects of Exodus chemokines on human NK cells were examined. Exodus-1, -2, and -3 did not induce detectable chemotaxis of resting peripheral blood NK cells. In contrast, Exodus-2 and -3 stimulated migration of polyclonal activated peripheral blood NK cells in a dose-dependent fashion. Exodus-2 and -3 also induced dose-dependent chemotaxis of NKL, an IL-2-dependent human NK cell line. Results of modified checkerboard assays indicate that migration of NKL cells in response to Exodus-2 and -3 represents true chemotaxis and not simply chemokinesis. Exodus-1, -2, and -3 did not induce NK cell proliferation in the absence of other stimuli. Nevertheless, Exodus-2 and -3 significantly augmented IL-2-induced proliferation of normal human CD56(dim) NK cells. In contrast, Exodus-1, -2, and -3 did not affect the cytolytic activity of resting or activated peripheral blood NK cells. Expression of message for CCR7, a shared receptor for Exodus-2 and -3, was detected in activated polyclonal NK cells and NKL cells but not resting NK cells. Taken together, these results indicate that Exodus-2 and -3 can participate in the recruitment and proliferation of activated NK cells. Exodus-2 and -3 may regulate interactions between T cells and NK cells that are crucial for the generation of optimal immune responses.
Chemokines are a family of related proteins that regulate leukocyte infiltration into inflamed tissue and play important roles in disease processes. Among the biologic activities of chemokines is inhibition of proliferation of normal hematopoietic progenitors. However, chemokines that inhibit normal progenitors rarely inhibit proliferation of hematopoietic progenitors from patients with chronic myelogenous leukemia (CML). We and others recently cloned a subfamily of CC chemokines that share similar amino-terminal peptide sequences and a remarkable ability to chemoattract T cells. These chemokines, Exodus-1/LARC/MIP-3alpha, Exodus-2/SLC/6Ckine/TCA4, and Exodus-3/CKbeta11/MIP-3beta, were found to inhibit proliferation of normal human marrow progenitors. The study described here found that these chemokines also inhibited the proliferation of progenitors in every sample of marrow from patients with CML that was tested. This demonstration of consistent inhibition of CML progenitor proliferation makes the 3 Exodus chemokines unique among chemokines. (Blood. 2000;95:1506-1508)
Chemokines have been hypothesized to contribute to the selectivity of lymphocyte trafficking not only as chemoattractants, but also by triggering integrin-dependent sticking (arrest) of circulating lymphocytes at venular sites of extravasation. We show that T cells roll on most Peyer's patch high endothelial venules (PP-HEVs), but preferentially arrest in segments displaying high levels of luminal secondary lymphoid tissue chemokine (SLC) (6Ckine, Exodus-2, thymus-derived chemotactic agent 4 [TCA-4]). This arrest is selectively inhibited by functional deletion (desensitization) of CC chemokine receptor 7 (CCR7), the receptor for SLC and for macrophage inflammatory protein (MIP)-3beta (EBV-induced molecule 1 ligand chemokine [ELC]), and does not occur in mutant DDD/1 mice that are deficient in these CCR7 ligands. In contrast, pertussis toxin-sensitive B cell sticking does not require SLC or MIP-3beta signaling, and occurs efficiently in SLC(low/-) HEV segments in wild-type mice, and in the SLC-negative HEVs of DDD/1 mice. Remarkably, sites of T and B cell firm adhesion are segregated in PPs, with HEVs supporting B cell accumulation concentrated in or near follicles, the target domain of most B cells entering PPs, whereas T cells preferentially accumulate in interfollicular HEVs. Our findings reveal a fundamental difference in signaling requirements for PP-HEV recognition by T and B cells, and describe an unexpected level of specialization of HEVs that may allow differential, segmental control of lymphocyte subset recruitment into functionally distinct lymphoid microenvironments in vivo.
T cell homing to peripheral lymph nodes (PLNs) is defined by a multistep sequence of interactions between lymphocytes and endothelial cells in high endothelial venules (HEVs). After initial tethering and rolling via L-selectin, firm adhesion of T cells requires rapid upregulation of lymphocyte function-associated antigen 1 (LFA-1) adhesiveness by a previously unknown pathway that activates a Galpha(i)-linked receptor. Here, we used intravital microscopy of murine PLNs to study the role of thymus-derived chemotactic agent (TCA)-4 (secondary lymphoid tissue chemokine, 6Ckine, Exodus-2) in homing of adoptively transferred T cells from T-GFP mice, a transgenic strain that expresses green fluorescent protein (GFP) selectively in naive T lymphocytes (T(GFP) cells). TCA-4 was constitutively presented on the luminal surface of HEVs, where it was required for LFA-1 activation on rolling T(GFP) cells. Desensitization of the TCA-4 receptor, CC chemokine receptor 7 (CCR7), blocked T(GFP) cell adherence in wild-type HEVs, whereas desensitization to stromal cell-derived factor (SDF)-1alpha (the ligand for CXC chemokine receptor 4 [CXCR4]) did not affect T(GFP) cell behavior. TCA-4 protein was not detected on the luminal surface of PLN HEVs in plt/plt mice, which have a congenital defect in T cell homing to PLNs. Accordingly, T(GFP) cells rolled but did not arrest in plt/plt HEVs. When TCA-4 was injected intracutaneously into plt/plt mice, the chemokine entered afferent lymph vessels and accumulated in draining PLNs. 2 h after intracutaneous injection, luminal presentation of TCA-4 was detectable in a subset of HEVs, and LFA-1-mediated T(GFP) cell adhesion was restored in these vessels. We conclude that TCA-4 is both required and sufficient for LFA-1 activation on rolling T cells in PLN HEVs. This study also highlights a hitherto undocumented role for chemokines contained in afferent lymph, which may modulate leukocyte recruitment in draining PLNs.
The chemokine receptor CCR-7 is expressed in T, NK, and dendritic cells in a time-ordered and stimulus-dependent manner. Thorough analyses of the pharmacological profiles of the recombinant ligands for CCR-7, MIP-3beta/ELC/CK-beta 11, and SLC/Exodus-2/TCA4/6C-kine, using CCR-7-expressing HEK-293E transfectants determine that ligands both bind with a K(d) in the 100 pM range-10- to 100-fold greater affinities than published K(d) values. High-affinity binding of each ligand is associated with rapid mobilization of intracellular calcium and cell migration as predicted for chemokine GPCRs, and in keeping with more recent evidence, robust activation of mitogen-activated protein kinase (MAPK).
We and other workers have recently isolated three novel CC chemokines termed Exodus-1/LARC/Mip-3alpha, Exodus-2/6Ckine/SLC/TCA4, and Exodus-3/Mip-3beta/CKbeta11/ELC. These chemokines share an amino terminal Asp-Cys-Cys-Leu sequence, unique among all chemokines. They also selectively regulate migration of adult T cells. Indeed, there is evidence that Exodus-2 and -3 are critical for adult T-cell adhesion to high endothelial venules in lymph nodes, a rate-limiting step for T-cell trafficking through nodal tissue. Less is known of the factors controlling migration of naïve human fetal T cells. We tested whether these chemokines could regulate chemotaxis in cord blood T-cell populations, and compared that efficacy with normal peripheral blood adult T cells. The findings indicated that naive CD45RA+ cord blood T-cell migration is stimulated by Exodus-2 and -3, and CD4+ cord blood T cells are attracted preferentially by Exodus-2 or -3 as compared with CD8+. Exodus-2 and -3 are likely to be critical in regulating the flux of naive CD4 + fetal T-cell population of secondary lymphoid tissue.
The CC chemokine known as 6Ckine (SLC, Exodus-2, or TCA4) has been identified as a ligand for CCR7. Mouse 6Ckine has also been shown to signal through mouse CXCR3 and share some of the activities of IFN-gamma inducible protein 10 and monokine induced by IFN-gamma. Nonetheless, human 6Ckine has not been shown to bind CXCR3 receptor or have angiostatic activity. In this study, we report that human 6Ckine does not induce a calcium flux in either human CXCR3 or mouse CXCR3 transfected cells, although it is an equally potent agonist as mouse 6Ckine and human macrophage inflammatory protein-3beta in human CCR7 transfected cells. Mouse 6Ckine (but not human 6Ckine) is capable of competing with radiolabeled IFN-gamma inducible protein 10 for human CXCR3. In addition, radiolabeled human 6Ckine does not bind to either human CXCR3 or mouse CXCR3. Together these data suggest that human CC chemokine 6Ckine is not a ligand for the human or mouse CXC chemokine receptor CXCR3.
The attachment of leukocytes to the endothelium is a multistep process that depends upon a very rapid increase in the adhesive activity of leukocyte integrins. A pertussis toxin-sensitive pathway stimulates integrin-dependent lymphocyte adhesion to Peyer's patch high endothelial venules in vivo, but the factors responsible for activating this pathway have not been identified previously. We now report that secondary lymphoid-tissue chemokine (SLC) (also known as 6Ckine, Exodus-2, and thymus-derived chemotactic agent 4), a recently described CC chemokine that is expressed in Peyer's patches and lymph nodes, rapidly activates integrin-mediated lymphocyte adhesion. Immobilized SLC increased the adhesion of HUT-78 T cells and human PBLs to mucosal addressin cell adhesion molecule-1, a protein that is expressed on Peyer's patch and mesenteric lymph node high endothelial venules. This effect of SLC was seen in both static and flow chamber adhesion assays, was mediated by integrin alpha 4 beta 7, and was inhibited by pertussis toxin. The other CC chemokines tested did not increase adhesion to mucosal addressin cell adhesion molecule-1. SLC had a greater effect on naive CD4+ T cells than on memory CD4+ T cells; CD8+ T cells, B cells, and NK cells were also responsive to SLC. SLC is likely to play an important role in regulating the recruitment of lymphocytes to Peyer's patches and lymph nodes.
Secondary lymphoid-tissue chemokine, SLC, also known as exodus-2 and 6Ckine, is a novel CC chemokine with selectivity for T lymphocytes and preferential expression in lymphoid tissues. We have studied its production, receptor usage and biological activities. High levels of SLC mRNA were detected in lymph nodes, the gastrointestinal tract and several gland tissues, but no expression was found by Northern blot analysis in freshly isolated or stimulated blood monocytes and lymphocytes, or neutrophils and eosinophils. In situ hybridization revealed constitutive expression of SLC in the T cell areas and the marginal zone of follicles in lymph nodes and the mucosa-associated lymphoid tissue, but not in B cell areas or sinuses. Comparison with immunocytochemical staining showed similarity between the in situ expression of SLC and the distribution of interdigitating dendritic cells but not with sinus-lining dendritic cells, macrophages or T lymphocytes. SLC induced chemotaxis of T lymphocytes and its activity increased considerably when the cells were conditioned with IL-2 or phytohemagglutinin (PHA). Under optimal conditions SLC had unusually high efficacy and induced the migration of up to 50 % of input T lymphocytes. SLC also induced Ca2+ mobilization in these cells. Similar responses were obtained with EBI1 ligand chemokine (ELC), and sequential stimulation with both chemokines led to cross-desensitization, suggesting that SLC acts via the ELC receptor, CCR7. This was confirmed using murine pre-B cells stably transfected with CCR7 which bound SLC with high affinity and showed chemotaxis and Ca2+ mobilization in response to both SLC and ELC. In T lymphocytes PHA and IL-2, which enhanced chemotactic responsiveness, also markedly enhanced CCR7 expression. In contrast to all known chemokine receptors, up-regulation of CCR7 by IL-2 was transient. A maximum was reached in 2-3 days and expression returned to initial levels within 8-10 days. The present study shows that SLC is constitutively produced within the T cell areas of secondary lymphoid organs and attracts T lymphocytes via CCR7.
The beta chemokine known as 6-C-kine, secondary lymphoid-tissue chemokine (SLC), TCA4, or Exodus-2 (herein referred to as 6CK/SLC) can trigger rapid integrin-dependent arrest of lymphocytes rolling under physiological shear and is highly expressed by high endothelial venules, specialized vessels involved in lymphocyte homing from the blood into lymph nodes and Peyer's patches. We show that 6CK/SLC is an agonist for the lymphocyte chemoattractant receptor, CCR7 (EBI-1, BLR-2), previously described as a receptor for the related beta chemokine MIP-3beta (ELC or Exodus-3). Moreover, 6CK/SLC and MIP-3beta attract the same major populations of circulating lymphocytes, including naive and memory T cells > B cells (but not natural killer cells); desensitization to MIP-3beta inhibits lymphocyte chemotaxis to 6CK/SLC but not to the alpha chemokine SDF-1 (stromal cell-derived factor); and 6CK/SLC competes for MIP-3beta binding to resting mouse lymphocytes. The findings suggest that the majority of circulating lymphocytes respond to 6CK/SLC and MIP-3beta in large part through their common receptor CCR7 and that these molecules may be important mediators of physiological lymphocyte recirculation in vivo.
Circulating lymphocytes are recruited from the blood to the tissue by rolling along the endothelium until being stopped by a signaling event linked to the Gialpha subunit of a heterotrimeric GTP-binding protein; that event then triggers rapid integrin-dependent adhesion. Four chemokines are now shown to induce such adhesion to intercellular adhesion molecule-1 and to induce arrest of rolling cells within 1 second under flow conditions similar to those of blood. SDF-1 (also called PBSF), 6-C-kine (also called Exodus-2), and MIP-3beta (also called ELC or Exodus-3) induced adhesion of most circulating lymphocytes, including most CD4+ T cells; and MIP-3alpha (also called LARC or Exodus-1) triggered adhesion of memory, but not naïve, CD4+ T cells. Thus, chemokines can regulate the arrest of lymphocyte subsets under flowing conditions, which may allow them to control lymphocyte-endothelial cell recognition and lymphocyte recruitment in vivo.
Homeostasis of T cell numbers in the periphery implies an ability of lymphocytes to sense cell numbers. Although the mechanisms are unknown, we find that the chemokine CCL21 (also known as TCA4, SLC, 6Ckine), a ligand for the chemokine receptor CCR7, can regulate homeostasis of CD4 (but not CD8) T cells. In the absence of CCR7 ligands, transferred CD4 T cells failed to expand in lymphopenic hosts, whereas in the presence of CCL21 overexpression, homeostatic CD4 T cell proliferation occurred even in nonlymphopenic recipients. Ag-specific CD4 T cells transferred into Ag-expressing mice proliferated and induced autoimmunity only in lymphopenic recipients. Pancreatic expression of CCL21 was sufficient to replace the requirement for lymphopenia in the progression of autoimmune disease. These results suggest that CD4 T cells use local concentrations of CCR7 ligands as an index of T cell steady state numbers and that homeostatic expansion of the T cell population may be a contributing factor in the development of autoimmune disease.
To test whether accumulation of naive lymphocytes is sufficient to trigger lymphoid development, we generated mice with islet expression of the chemokine TCA4/SLC. This chemokine is specific for naive lymphocytes and mature dendritic cells (DC) which express the CCR7 receptor. Islets initially developed accumulations of T cells with DC, with scattered B cells at the perimeter. These infiltrates consolidated into organized lymphoid tissue, with high endothelial venules and stromal reticulum. Infiltrate lymphocytes showed a naive CD44low CD25- CD69- phenotype, though half were CD62L negative. When backcrossed to RAG-1 knockout, DC were not recruited. Interestingly, islet lymphoid tissue developed in backcrosses to Ikaros knockout mice despite the absence of normal peripheral nodes. Our results indicate that TCA4/SLC can induce the development and organization of lymphoid tissue through diffential recruitment of T and B lymphocytes and secondary effects on stromal cell development.
Chemokines induce chemotaxis of hematopoietic progenitor cells (HPC), and suppress their proliferation. In this study we report that SLC/ Exodus2/6Ckine/TCA4 (hereafter termed SLC) is a chemoattractant for human CD34+ HPC. SLC mainly induces preferential chemotaxis of macrophage progenitors. We examined the chemotactic activity of CXCR3 ligands on CD34+ HPC because it has been reported that SLC is a potential ligand of CXC chemokine receptor, CXCR3, in addition to a CC chemokine receptor, CCR7. It was found that the CXCR3 ligands, MIG and interferon-gamma inducible protein-10 (IP-10), unlike SLC, did not induce chemotaxis of CD34+ HPC. In this regard, CCR7 ligands (SLC and CKbeta-11), but not IP-10 and MIG, induce actin polymerization in CD34+ cells. On the other hand, CCR7 ligands and CXCR3 ligands, but not the CXCR4 ligand SDF-1, showed inhibitory activity for proliferation of myeloid progenitor cells. Our results suggest that SLC is a potential trafficking factor for HPC, and that chemokines that bind CCR7, CXCR4, and CXCR3 have differential biological activities on HPC in terms of suppression and chemotaxis.
Two human CC chemokines, SLC/6Ckine/Exodus2/TCA4 and CKbeta-11/MIP-3beta/ELC, are previously reported as efficacious chemoattractants for T- and B-cells and dendritic cells. SLC and CKbeta-11 share only 32% amino acid identity, but are ligands for the same chemokine receptor, CCR7. In this study, we examined chemotactic activity of SLC and CKbeta-11 for NK cells and lymphoid progenitors in bone marrow and thymus. It was found that these two CCR7 ligands are chemoattractants for neonatal cord blood and adult peripheral blood NK cells and cell lines. SLC and CKbeta-11 preferentially attract the CD56(+)CD16(-) NK cell subset over CD56(+)CD16(+) NK cells. SLC and CKbeta-11 also demonstrate selective chemotactic activity on late stage CD34(-)CD19(+)IgM- B-cell progenitors and CD4(+) and CD8(+) single-positive thymocytes, but not early stage progenitors. It was noted that SLC is an efficient desensitizer of CKbeta-11-dependent NK cell chemotaxis, while CKbeta-11 is a weak desensitizer of SLC-dependent chemotaxis. Taken together, these results suggest that SLC and CKbeta-11 have the potential to control trafficking of NK cell subsets and late stage lymphoid progenitors in bone marrow and thymus.
Antigen presenting cells play a pivotal role in the adaptive immune response in hypersensitivity pneumonitis (HP). It was hypothesised that lymphangiogenesis is involved in the pathophysiology of HP via cell transport.
To determine the clinical significance of lymphangiogenic factors in HP.
Levels of vascular endothelial growth factors (VEGF)-A, VEGF-C, VEGF-D and CCL21 in the serum and bronchoalveolar lavage fluid (BALF) were measured in 29 healthy volunteers, 14 patients with idiopathic pulmonary fibrosis (IPF) and 26 patients with HP by ELISA. Additionally, immunohistochemical analyses were performed using lung specimens of patients with HP (n=8) and IPF (n=10).
BALF VEGF-D levels were significantly elevated in patients with HP compared to the other groups. BALF VEGF-D levels in patients with HP correlated significantly with the BALF total cell and lymphocyte counts (r=0.485, p=0.014 and r=0.717, p<0.0001, respectively). BALF VEGF-C and CCL21 levels were increased in patients with HP compared to healthy volunteers, but not patients with IPF. BALF CCL21 levels were negatively correlated with the forced expiratory volume in 1 s percentage and diffuse capacity of the lung for carbon monoxide (r=-0.662, p=0.007 and r=-0.671, p=0.024, respectively). According to the immunohistochemical analyses, CCL21 was expressed in the lymphatic endothelium in both conditions and CCR7(+) cells were aggregated around lymphatics in patients with HP, but not in patients with IPF.
Lymphangiogenic factors might be associated with the inflammatory and functional severity of HP. The increased BALF VEGF-D levels were associated with lymphatic alveolitis intensity, and CCL21 with lung function impairment.
Chemokines are a large family of chemotactic cytokines. Based on the arrangement of the first two cysteine residues, chemokines are divided into four groups, one of which is the CC chemokine group. In this study, we characterized a CC chemokine, CsCCL21, from half-smooth tongue sole (Cynoglossus semilaevis), and analyzed its activity. CsCCL21 contains two conserved N-terminal cysteine residues in a NCCL motif and is phylogenetically related to the CCL19/21/25 subgroup of CC chemokines. CsCCL21 was constitutively expressed in nine tissues and significantly upregulated by bacterial and viral infection. The recombinant CsCCL21 (rCsCCL21) induced migration of peripheral blood leukocytes. When the two conserved cysteine residues in the NCCL motif were mutated, the chemotactic activity of rCsCCL21 was abolished. rCsCCL21 enhanced the resistance of tongue sole against bacterial infection, but the mutant protein with NCCL mutation lacked this antibacterial effect. Taken together, these results suggest that CsCCL21 is a functional CC chemokine with the ability to recruit leukocytes and is involved in antibacterial immunity in a manner that requires the conserved NCCL motif.
Over-activation of cellular inflammatory effectors adversely affects myocardial function after acute myocardial infarction (AMI). The CC-chemokine CCL21 is, via its receptor CCR7, one of the key regulators of inflammation and immune cell recruitment, participates in various inflammatory disorders, including cardiovascular ones. This study explored the therapeutic effect of an anti-CCL21 antibody in cardiac remodeling after myocardial infarction.
An animal model of AMI generated by left anterior descending coronary artery ligation in C57BL/6 mice resulted in higher levels of circulating CCL21 and cardiac CCR7. Neutralization of CCL21 by intravenous injection of anti-CCL21 monoclonal antibody reduced infarct size after AMI, decreased serum levels of neutrophil and monocyte chemo attractants post AMI, diminished neutrophil and macrophage recruitment in infarcted myocardium, and suppressed MMP-9 and total collagen content in myocardium. Anti-CCL21 treatment also limited cardiac enlargement and improved left ventricular function.
Our study indicated that CCL21 was involved in cardiac remodeling post infarction and anti-CCL21 strategies might be useful in the treatment of AMI.
Type 1 diabetes mellitus (T1D) is a chronic autoimmune disease caused by the selective destruction of pancreatic β cells, followed by hyperglycemia, oxidative stress and the subsequent extensive impairment of immune cell functions, a phenomenon responsible for the development of chronic diabetic complications. Propolis, a natural bee product that is extensively used in foods and beverages, significantly benefits human health. Specifically, propolis exerts antioxidant, anti-inflammatory and analgesic effects that may improve diabetic complications. To further elucidate the potential benefits of propolis, the present study investigated the effect of dietary supplementation with propolis on the plasma cytokine profiles, free radical levels, lipid profile and lymphocyte proliferation and chemotaxis in a streptozotocin (STZ)-induced type I diabetic mouse model.
Thirty male mice were equally distributed into 3 experimental groups: group 1, non-diabetic control mice; group 2, diabetic mice; and group 3, diabetic mice supplemented daily with an ethanol-soluble derivative of propolis (100 mg/kg body weight) for 1 month.
First, the induction of diabetes in mice was associated with hyperglycemia and significant decreases in the insulin level and the lymphocyte count. In this context, diabetic mice exhibited severe diabetic complications, as demonstrated by a significant decrease in the levels of IL-2, IL-4 and IL-7, prolonged elevation of the levels of pro-inflammatory cytokines (IL-1β, IL-6 and TNF-α) and reactive oxygen species (ROS) and altered lipid profiles compared with control non-diabetic mice. Moreover, antigen stimulation of B and T lymphocytes markedly reduced the proliferative capacity and chemotaxis of these cells towards CCL21 and CXCL12 in diabetic mice compared with control mice. Interestingly, compared with diabetes induction alone, treatment of diabetic mice with propolis significantly restored the plasma cytokine and ROS levels and the lipid profile to nearly normal levels. Most importantly, compared with untreated diabetic mice, diabetic mice treated with propolis exhibited significantly enhanced lymphocyte proliferation and chemotaxis towards CCL21 and CXCL12.
Our findings reveal the potential immuno-modulatory effects of propolis, which acts as a natural antioxidant to enhance the function of immune cells during diabetes.
Memory/effector T cells recirculate through extralymphoid tissues by entering from blood and egressing via afferent lymph. Although T cell entry into effector sites is key to inflammation, the relevance of T cell egress to this process is unknown. In this study, we found that Ag recognition at the effector site reduced the tissue egress of proinflammatory Th1 cells in a mouse model of delayed hypersensitivity. Transgenic expression of "tissue exit receptor" CCR7 enhanced lymphatic egress of Ag-sequestered Th1 cells from the inflamed site and alleviated inflammation. In contrast, lack of CCR7 on Th1 cells diminished their tissue egress while enhancing inflammation. Lymph-borne Th1 and Th17 cells draining the inflamed skin of sheep migrated toward the CCR7 ligand CCL21, suggesting the CCR7-CCL21 axis as a physiological target in regulating inflammation. In conclusion, exit receptors can be targeted to modulate T cell dwell time and inflammation at effector sites, revealing T cell tissue egress as a novel control point of inflammation.
Our objective was to better understand the roles of single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) in the CCL21, ERBB3, and TERT genes region in the development of idiopathic inflammatory myopathies (IIMs), we explored the associations between SNPs in the mentioned three genes and IIMs susceptibility in a Chinese Han population.
Chinese polymyositis (PM) patients (n =291), dermatomyositis (DM) patients (n=526) and ethnically-matched healthy controls (n =968) were genotyped for the CCL21 region SNPs (rs951005 and rs2492358), ERBB3 (rs2292239 and rs11171739), and TERT (rs2853676 and rs10069690), by using the Sequenom MassArray system.
Our study indicated strong allele and genotype associations between rs951005 (OR: 1.65, 95%CI: 1.18-2.30, Pc=0.015; Pc=0.041, respectively) in CCL21 gene and PM patients. Additionally, rs951005 was associated with interstitial lung disease (ILD) in PM patients (Pc =0.01), and was associated with PM patients in additive model. However, the Chinese Han PM/DM patients and controls had statistically similar frequencies of alleles, genotypes and different genetic models (additive, dominant, and recessive) of ERBB3 and TERT polymorphisms.
This was the first study to demonstrate that the CCL21 gene SNP (rs951005) might confer genetic predisposition to PM patients or such patients with ILD in a Chinese Han population.
The cellular prion protein is expressed in almost all tissues, including the central nervous system and lymphoid tissues. To investigate the effects of the prion protein in lymphoid cells and spleen structure formation, we used prion protein-deficient (Prnp(0/0)) Zürich I mice generated by inactivation of the Prnp gene. Prnp(0/0) mice had decreased lymphocytes, in particular, CD4 T cells and lymphoid tissue inducer (LTi) cells. Decreased CD4 T cells resulted from impaired expression of CCL19 and CCL21 in the spleen rather than altered chemokine receptor CCR7 expression. Importantly, some of the white pulp regions in spleens from Prnp(0/0) mice displayed impaired T zone structure as a result of decreased LTi cell numbers and altered expression of the lymphoid tissue-organizing genes lymphotoxin-α and CXCR5, although expression of the lymphatic marker podoplanin and CXCL13 by stromal cells was not affected. In addition, CD3(-)CD4(+)IL-7Rα(+) LTi cells were rarely detected in impaired white pulp in spleens of these mice. These data suggest that the prion protein is required to form the splenic white pulp structure and for development of normal levels of CD4 T and LTi cells.
Human natural killer (NK) cell subsets differentially distribute throughout the organism. While CD56(dim) and CD56(bright) NK cell subsets similarly reside in the bone marrow (BM), the CD56(dim) population predominantly accumulates in non-lymphoid tissues and the CD56(bright) counterpart in lymphoid tissue (LT). The dynamics with which these NK cell subsets redistribute to tissues remains unexplored. Here, we studied individuals newly exposed to fingolimod, a drug that efficiently blocks sphingosine-1-phosphate (S1P)-directed lymphocyte - including NK cell - egress from tissue to blood. During an observation period of 6h peripheral blood depletion of CD56(bright) NK cells was observed 3 h after first dose of fingolimod, with 40-50% depletion after 6 h, while a decrease of the numbers of CD56(dim) NK cells did not reach the level of statistical significance. In vitro, CD56(bright) and CD56(dim) NK cells responded comparably to the BM-homing chemokine CXCL12, while CD56(bright) NK cells migrated more efficiently in gradients of the LT-homing chemokines CCL19 and CCL21. In conjuncture with these in vitro studies, the indirectly observed subset-specific depletion kinetics from blood are compatible with preferential and more rapid redistribution of CD56(bright) NK cells from blood to peripheral tissue such as LT and possibly also the inflamed central nervous system. These data shed light on an unexplored level at which access of NK cells to LT, and thus, for example antigen-presenting cells, is regulated.
The CD34+ MUTZ-3 acute myeloid leukemia cell line has been used as a dendritic cell (DC) differentiation model. This cell line can be cultured into Langerhans cell (LC) or interstitial DC-like cells using the same cytokine cocktails used for the differentiation of their primary counterparts. Currently, there is an increasing interest in the study and clinical application of DC generated in the presence of IFNα, as these IFNα-DC produce high levels of inflammatory cytokines and have been suggested to be more potent in their ability to cross-present protein antigens, as compared to the more commonly used IL-4-DC. Here, we report on the generation of IFNα-induced MUTZ-DC. We show that IFNα MUTZ-DC morphologically and phenotypically display characteristic DC features and are functionally equivalent to "classic" IL-4 MUTZ-DC. IFNα MUTZ-DC ingest exogenous antigens and can subsequently cross-present HLA class-I restricted epitopes to specific CD8+ T cells. Importantly, mature IFNα MUTZ-DC express CCR7, migrate in response to CCL21, and are capable of priming naïve antigen-specific CD8+ T cells. In conclusion, we show that the MUTZ-3 cell line offers a viable and sustainable model system to study IFNα driven DC development and functionality.
QBP359 is an IgG1 human monoclonal antibody that binds with high affinity to human CCL21, a chemokine hypothesized to play a role in inflammatory disease conditions through activation of resident CCR7-expressing fibroblasts/myofibroblasts. The pharmacokinetics (PK) and pharmacodynamics (PD) of QBP359 in non-human primates were characterized through an integrated approach, combining PK, PD, immunogenicity, immunohistochemistry (IHC) and tissue profiling data from single- and multiple-dose experiments in cynomolgus monkeys. When compared with regular immunoglobulin typical kinetics, faster drug clearance was observed in serum following intravenous administration of 10 mg/kg and 50 mg/kg of QBP359. We have shown by means of PK/PD modeling that clearance of mAb-ligand complex is the most likely explanation for the rapid clearance of QBP359 in cynomolgus monkey. IHC and liquid chromatography mass spectrometry data suggested a high turnover and synthesis rate of CCL21 in tissues. Although lymphoid tissue was expected to accumulate drug due to the high levels of CCL21 present, bioavailability following subcutaneous administration in monkeys was 52%. In human disease states, where CCL21 expression is believed to be expressed at 10-fold higher concentrations compared with cynomolgus monkeys, the PK/PD model of QBP359 and its binding to CCL21 suggested that very large doses requiring frequent administration of mAb would be required to maintain suppression of CCL21 in the clinical setting. This highlights the difficulty in targeting soluble proteins with high synthesis rates.
Reports of lymphatics in the anterior human uvea are contradictory. This might be caused due to a certain topography, which has not been considered yet. Therefore, here we systematically analyze iris and adjacent ciliary body with immunohistochemistry by combining various lymphatic markers.
Human iris and ciliary body were obtained from cornea donors and prepared for cryosectioning. Cross sections of tissue blocks at 12/3/6/9 o'clock position and at corresponding intersections (1:30/4:30/7:30/10:30) were processed for immunohistochemistry of LYVE-1, PDPN, PROX1, FOXC2, VEGFR3, and CCL21, and when necessary, these lymphatic markers were combined with CD31, α-smooth muscle-actin, CD68, and 4',6-diamidino-2 phenylindole dihydrochloride (DAPI). Double, triple, and quadruple marker combinations were documented using confocal microscopy.
Numerous podoplanin+ cells were mainly located at the anterior border of the iris while LYVE-1+ cells were distributed throughout the nonpigmented part. Both cell populations were PROX1/FOXC2/CCL21/VEGFR3-. Blood vessels, iris smooth muscles, and individual cells were VEGFR3+. While PDPN+ cells were rarely detected posteriorly of the iris root, many LYVE-1+ cells were present within the ciliary body muscle and villi. Within the muscle, occasionally PDPN+ vessel-like structures were detectable, but these were never colocalized with LYVE-1. Similar vessel-like structures were VEGFR3+/PROX1-/CCL21-, but CD31+. Further, ciliary muscle fibers and ciliary epithelium were immunoreactive for VEGFR3/CCL21, but were LYVE-1/PDPN-. A certain topography of structures at the various uvea-positions investigated was not obvious. The majority of LYVE-1+ cells displayed immunoreactivity for CD68.
Lymphatic vessels colocalizing for at least two lymphatic markers were not detectable. Therefore, if present, putative lymphatic channels of the anterior uvea might display a different marker panel than generally presumed.
Type 1 diabetes mellitus (T1D) is associated with increased type 1 interferon (IFN) levels and subsequent severe defects in lymphocyte function, which increase susceptibility to infections. The blockade of type 1 IFN receptor 1 (IFNAR1) in non-obese diabetic mice has been shown to delay T1D onset and decrease T1D incidence by enhancing spleen CD4+ T cells and restoring B cell function. However, the effect of type 1 IFN blockade during T1D on splenic CD8+ T cells has not previously been studied. Therefore, we investigated, for the first time, the effect of IFNAR1 blockade on the survival and architecture of spleen-homing CD8+ T cells in a streptozotocin-induced T1D mouse model. Three groups of mice were examined: a non-diabetic control group; a diabetic group; and a diabetic group treated with an anti-IFNAR1 blocking antibody. We observed that T1D induction was accompanied by a marked destruction of β cells followed by a marked reduction in insulin levels and increased IFN-α and IFN-β levels in the diabetic group. The diabetic mice also exhibited many abnormal changes including an elevation in blood and spleen free radical (reactive oxygen species and nitric oxide) and pro-inflammatory cytokine (IL-6 and TNF-α) levels, a significant decrease in IL-7 levels, and subsequently, a significant decrease in the numbers of spleen-homing CD8+ T cells. This decrease in spleen-homing CD8+ T cells resulted from a marked reduction in the CCL21-mediated entry of CD8+ T cells into the spleen and from increased apoptosis due to a marked reduction in IL-7-mediated STAT5 and AKT phosphorylation. Interestingly, type 1 IFN signaling blockade in diabetic mice significantly restored the numbers of splenic CD8+ T cells by restoring free radical, pro-inflammatory cytokine and IL-7 levels. These effects subsequently rescued splenic CD8+ T cells from apoptosis through a mechanism that was dependent upon CCL21- and IL-7-mediated signaling. Our data suggest that type 1 IFN is an essential mediator of pathogenesis in T1D and that this role results from the negative effect of IFN signaling on the survival of splenic CD8+ T cells.
The spleen combines the innate and adaptive immune systems in a uniquely organized way. The excision of spleen will induce many complications, especially the increased susceptibility to infections. Recent research shows that besides playing roles during the immune responses, the spleen is also an important organ during immunoregulation, which is different from other secondary lymphoid organs. This unique function is mainly realized by modulating cell migration and proliferation in the spleen. This review provides a better understanding of the functions of this complex organ gained from recent studies.
The functional relevance of synovial ectopic lymphoid neogenesis (ELN) in rheumatoid arthritis (RA) remains unknown. As ELN correlates with the degree of tissue inflammation, we investigated whether ELN was associated with specific cytokine profiles.
Synovial ELN was determined by immunohistology and long CD21 isoform (CD21L) expression. Cytokine expression was determined by multiplex enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay (ELISA) and quantitative polymerase chain reaction (PCR) as well as immunohistology in synovial fluid (SF) (n = 44) and tissue (ST) (n = 108), respectively. Production of ELN-associated chemokines by fibroblast-like synoviocytes (FLS) was studied in vitro.
Screening analysis of SF by multiplex ELISA showed higher protein levels of interleukin (IL)-23 (p = 0.018) and IL-17F (p = 0.028) in ELN+ versus ELN- samples. Other cytokines, including IL-17A, IL-6, and tumor necrosis factor (TNF)-α, were not different. The association between IL-23 and ELN was not biased by disease activity or other clinical features and was confirmed by higher IL-23 mRNA expression in ELN+ versus ELN- ST samples (p = 0.030), a correlation between IL-23 and CD21L expression in the same samples (r = 0.70 p < 0.0001), and a similar correlation in two independent ST sample sets (r = 0.778 p < 0.0001 and r = 0.817 p = 0.011). IL-23 p19 staining was neither restricted nor enhanced in close proximity of ectopic lymphoid follicles, and neither IL-23 nor IL-17A stimulation induced expression of the ELN-associated CC chemokine ligand, CCL21 and CXC chemokine ligand CXCL13, by FLS. Downstream of IL-23, CD21L expression was significantly associated with IL-17F, IL-21, and IL-22, but not IL-17A in two independent ST sample sets.
Synovial ELN in RA is strongly associated with activation of the IL-23 pathway but not with IL-17A.
Objective To identify the distribution of chemokine (C-C motif) ligand 21 (CCL21) in the thymus of patients with myasthenia gravis (MG) and explore the effects of up-regulation of CCL21 on the expressions of antigen presentation-related genes in cytokeratin 8/18 (CK8/18) positive thymic epithelial cells (TECs) after transfected with CCL21 genes. Methods The expressions and distributions of CK8/18 and CCL21 in the thymus tissue of MG patients were detected by immunohistochemistry. The mRNA levels of CCL21, CCL19 and their receptor chemokine (C-C motif) receptor 7 (CCR7) in the thymus tissue of MG patients were determined by real-time quantitative PCR (qRT-PCR). Primary cultured CK8/18(+) TECs were transfected with pCMV-CCL21, and the relative mRNA expressions of function-associated genes (CD80, ICAM-1, CD86, HLA-DR, HLA-A) in CK8/18(+) TECs before and after the transfection were investigated by qRT-PCR. Results Immunohistochemical results showed that the number of CK8/18 positive cells in the hyperplastic thymus tissues of MG patients was significantly more than that in the normal controls, and the protein expression of CCL21 was also much higher in the hyperplastic thymus tissues. The qRT-PCR showed that the expressions of CCL21 and CCR7 mRNA increased significantly in hyperplastic thymus tissues of MG patients compared with those in normal controls, while there was no difference in the expression of CCL19. Furthermore, CK8/18 positive cells were found mainly located in cortico-medullary junction and medulla area. The relative mRNA expression levels of HLA-A, HLA-DR, ICAM and CD80 rose significantly in CK8/18(+) TECs after transfected with pCMV-CCL21. Conclusion The over-expression of CCL21 could increased the expressions of antigen presentation-related genes in CK8/18(+) TECs in MG patients.
CCL19 and CCL21 are chemokines involved in the trafficking of immune cells, particularly within the lymphatic system, through activation of CCR7. Concurrent expression of PSGL-1 and CCR7 in naive T-cells enhances recruitment of these cells to secondary lymphoid organs by CCL19 and CCL21. Here the solution structure of CCL19 is reported. It contains a canonical chemokine domain. Chemical shift mapping shows the N-termini of PSGL-1 and CCR7 have overlapping binding sites for CCL19 and binding is competitive. Implications for the mechanism of PSGL-1's enhancement of resting T-cell recruitment are discussed.
Intravital imaging has revealed that T cells change their migratory behavior during physiological activation inside lymphoid tissue. Yet, it remains less well investigated how the intrinsic migratory capacity of activated T cells is regulated by chemokine receptor levels or other regulatory elements. Here, we used an adjuvant-driven inflammation model to examine how motility patterns corresponded with CCR7, CXCR4, and CXCR5 expression levels on ovalbumin-specific DO11.10 CD4(+) T cells in draining lymph nodes. We found that while CCR7 and CXCR4 surface levels remained essentially unaltered during the first 48-72 h after activation of CD4(+) T cells, their in vitro chemokinetic and directed migratory capacity to the respective ligands, CCL19, CCL21, and CXCL12, was substantially reduced during this time window. Activated T cells recovered from this temporary decrease in motility on day 6 post immunization, coinciding with increased migration to the CXCR5 ligand CXCL13. The transiently impaired CD4(+) T cell motility pattern correlated with increased LFA-1 expression and augmented phosphorylation of the microtubule regulator Stathmin on day 3 post immunization, yet neither microtubule destabilization nor integrin blocking could reverse TCR-imprinted unresponsiveness. Furthermore, protein kinase C (PKC) inhibition did not restore chemotactic activity, ruling out PKC-mediated receptor desensitization as mechanism for reduced migration in activated T cells. Thus, we identify a cell-intrinsic, chemokine receptor level-uncoupled decrease in motility in CD4(+) T cells shortly after activation, coinciding with clonal expansion. The transiently reduced ability to react to chemokinetic and chemotactic stimuli may contribute to the sequestering of activated CD4(+) T cells in reactive peripheral lymph nodes, allowing for integration of costimulatory signals required for full activation.
Chronic myeloid leukemia is a clonal disease characterized by the presence of the Philadelphia chromosome and its oncogenic product, BCR-ABL, which activates multiple pathways involved in cell survival, growth promotion, and disease progression. We previously reported that in murine hematopoietic Ba/F3 cells, signal transducing adaptor protein-2 (STAP-2) binds to BCR-ABL and up-regulates BCR-ABL phosphorylation, leading to enhanced activation of its downstream signaling molecules. The binding of STAP-2 to BCR-ABL also influenced the expression levels of chemokine receptors, such as CXCR4 and CCR7. For the induction of CCR7 expression, signals mediated by the MAPK/ERK pathway were critical in Ba/F3 cells expressing BCR-ABL and STAP-2. In addition, STAP-2 cooperated with BCR-ABL to induce the production of CCR7 ligands, CCL19 and CCL21. Our results demonstrate a contribution of CCR7 to STAP-2-dependent enhancement of BCR-ABL-mediated cell growth in Ba/F3 cells.
Monocyte-derived dendritic cells (DCs) are used as immunoadjuvant cells in cancer vaccines and have made great progress. However, an optimal DCs subset is vital for this treatment effect, the current 'gold standard' cytokine cocktail DCs have a shortcoming in their cytokines secretion, especially IL-12p70, mainly because of the existence of PGE2. Therefore, it is necessary to find an appropriate DCs-based immunotherapeutic protocol. In this study, we compared a novel 'improved' maturation cytokine cocktail with the current 'gold standard' maturation cytokine cocktail used for generating standard DCs. The 'improved' maturation cytokine cocktail DCs showed a higher levels surface markers expression (CD80, CD83, CD86 and HLA-DR), the chemokine receptors CXCR4 and CCR7 and chemokine CCL19, CCL21 and CXCL21, whereas CCR5 expression was reduced. Most importantly, in contrast to 'gold standard' DCs, which secrete little IL-12p70 and as a result induce mainly Th2 immunity, 'improved' cytokine cocktail DCs secreted higher levels IL-12p70 and also secreted similar concentration IL-10. To removal of PGE2 from the 'improved' DCs did increase the IL-12p70 production. In conclusion, we here present the 'improved' DCs, as an optimal maturation cocktail protocol, can induce high migratory potential, generate immunostimulatory DCs, produce higher levels IL-12p70 with superior capacity to induce Th1 immunity, when compared with the 'gold standard' DCs.
In addition to the secretion of Ag-specific Abs, B cells may play an important role in the generation of immune responses by efficiently presenting Ag to T cells. We and other investigators recently described a subpopulation of CD11c(+) B cells (Age/autoimmune-associated B cells [ABCs]) that appear with age, during virus infections, and at the onset of some autoimmune diseases and participate in autoimmune responses by secreting autoantibodies. In this study, we assessed the ability of these cells to present Ag and activate Ag-specific T cells. We demonstrated that ABCs present Ag to T cells, in vitro and in vivo, better than do follicular B cells (FO cells). Our data indicate that ABCs express higher levels of the chemokine receptor CCR7, have higher responsiveness to CCL21 and CCL19 than do FO cells, and are localized at the T/B cell border in spleen. Using multiphoton microscopy, we show that, in vivo, CD11c(+) B cells form significantly more stable interactions with T cells than do FO cells. Together, these data identify a previously undescribed role for ABCs as potent APCs and suggest another potential mechanism by which these cells can influence immune responses and/or the development of autoimmunity.
The presence of lymph node (LN)-like vasculature in tumours, characterized by expression of peripheral node addressin and chemokine CCL21, is correlated with T-cell infiltration and positive prognosis in breast cancer and melanoma patients. However, mechanisms controlling the development of LN-like vasculature and how it might contribute to a beneficial outcome for cancer patients are unknown. Here we demonstrate that LN-like vasculature is present in murine models of melanoma and lung carcinoma. It enables infiltration by naive T cells that significantly delay tumour outgrowth after intratumoral activation. Development of this vasculature is controlled by a mechanism involving effector CD8 T cells and NK cells that secrete LTα3 and IFNγ. LN-like vasculature is also associated with organized aggregates of B lymphocytes and gp38(+) fibroblasts, which resemble tertiary lymphoid organs that develop in models of chronic inflammation. These results establish LN-like vasculature as both a consequence of and key contributor to anti-tumour immunity.
It is well documented that inflammatory chemokines play a significant role in the development of multiple sclerosis (MS) and its model, experimental autoimmune encephalomyelitis (EAE). Recently, the involvement of homeostatic (or lymphoid) chemokines in the pathogenesis of autoimmune diseases has become an object of intensive study. In this work, quantitative analysis of CCL19, CCL21 and CCR7 expression in the central nervous system (CNS), as well as in inflammatory mononuclear cells isolated from several organs during the first attack, remission and the second attack of chronic-relapsing EAE (ChREAE), was performed. Using real-time PCR, RNAse Protection Assay and immunohistochemistry, the expression of both chemokines, as well as of their common receptor CCR7, was analyzed in the brain, spleen, lymph nodes and peripheral blood mononuclear cells. Increased expression of CCL19 and CCL21 was observed mostly in mononuclear inflammatory cells isolated from the CNS during active ChREAE. At the same time the expression of CCR7 in blood mononuclear leukocytes was reduced. This observation extends our current knowledge about the possible role of chemokines CCL19, CCL21 and their receptor CCR7 in the pathogenesis of ChREAE and, by extension, MS.
The inability to target cancer stem cells (CSC) may be a significant factor contributing to treatment failure. We have developed a strategy to target the CSC populations in melanoma and squamous cell carcinoma using CSC lysate-pulsed dendritic cells (DCs). The CSC-DC vaccine was administered in the adjuvant setting after localized radiation therapy of established tumors. Using mouse models we demonstrated that DCs pulsed with CSCs enriched by virtue of their expression of the CSC marker ALDH (termed CSC-DC) significantly inhibited tumor growth, reduced development of pulmonary metastases and prolonged survival. The effect was associated with downregulation of chemokine (C-C motif) receptors CCR7 and CCR10 in tumor cells and decreased expression of the chemokine (C-C motif) ligands CCL21, CCL27 and CCL28 in lung tissue. The CSC-DC vaccine significantly reduced ALDH(high) CSC frequency in primary tumors. Direct targeting of CSCs was demonstrated by the specific binding of IgG produced by ALDH(high) CSC-DC vaccine-primed B cells to ALDH(high) CSCs, resulting in lysis of these target CSCs in the presence of complement. These data suggest that the CSC-DC vaccine approach may be useful in the adjuvant setting where local and systemic relapse are high after conventional treatment of cancers.
The aim of this study was to elucidate the mechanisms responsible for the location of B-cell non-Hodgkin's lymphoma (B-NHL) at different anatomical sites. We speculated that the malignant B cells in these disorders have the potential for trafficking between blood and secondary lymphoid organs (SLO) or extranodal sites and that their preferential accumulation at different locations is governed by the expression of key molecules that regulate the trafficking of normal lymphocytes.
Biopsy or blood samples from 91 cases of B-NHL affecting SLO (n = 27), ocular adnexae (n = 51) or blood (n = 13) were analysed by immunohistochemistry or flow cytometry for the expression of the following molecules: CCR7, CCL21 and αL (required for the entry of normal lymphocytes into SLO); CXCR4, CXCL12 and α4 (required for entry into extranodal sites); CXCR5, CXCL13 and S1PR2 (required for tissue retention); S1PR1 and S1PR3 (required for egress into the blood). The expression of each of these molecules was then related to anatomical location and histological subtype.
The expression of motility/adhesion molecules varied widely between individual patient samples and correlated much more strongly with anatomical location than with histological subtype. SLO lymphomas [comprising 10 follicular lymphoma (FL), 8 diffuse large B-cell lymphoma (DLBCL), 4 mantle-cell lymphoma (MCL) and 5 marginal-zone lymphoma (MZL)] were characterised by pronounced over-expression of S1PR2, suggesting that the malignant cells in these lymphomas are actively retained at the site of clonal expansion. In contrast, the malignant B cells in ocular adnexal lymphomas (10 FL, 9 DLBCL, 4 MCL and 28 MZL) expressed a profile of molecules suggesting a dynamic process of trafficking involving not only tissue retention but also egress via S1PR3 and homing back to extranodal sites via CXCR4/CXCL12 and α4. Finally, leukaemic lymphomas (6 FL, 5 MCL and 2 MZL) were characterised by aberrant expression of the egress receptor S1PR1 and low expression of molecules required for tissue entry/retention.
In summary, our study strongly suggests that anatomical location in B-NHL is governed by the differential expression of specific adhesion/motility molecules. This novel observation has important implications for therapeutic strategies that aim to disrupt protective micro-environmental interactions.
Homing to distinct lymphoid organs enables chronic lymphocytic leukemia (CLL) cells to receive pro-survival and proliferative signals. Cytogenetic aberrations can significantly affect CLL cell compartmentalization. Trisomy 12 (tri12) defines a CLL subgroup with specific clinical features and increased levels of the negative prognostic marker CD49d, the α4-subunit of the integrin VLA-4, which is a key regulator of CLL cell homing to bone marrow (BM). Chemokine-induced inside-out VLA-4 activation, particularly via the CXCL12-CXCR4 axis, increases the arrest of various cell types on VCAM-1 presenting endothelium. Here, we demonstrate that high CD49d expression in tri12 CLL is accompanied by decreased CXCR4 expression. Dissecting functional consequences of these alterations, we observed that tri12 CLL cell homing to murine BM is not affected by CXCR4-CXCL12 blockage using AMD3100 or olaptesed pegol/NOX-A12. In line, CCL21-CCR7 rather than CXCL12-CXCR4 interactions triggered VLA-4-mediated arrests of tri12 CLL cells to VCAM-1 under blood flow conditions. Concordantly, in real-time kinetic analyses we found CCL21 but not CXCL12 being capable to induce inside-out VLA-4 conformational changes in this CLL subgroup. Our results provide novel insights into the peculiar clinico-biological behaviour of tri12 CLL and emphasize its specific chemokine and integrin utilization during pathophysiologically and therapeutically relevant interactions with the microenvironment.
We compared migration activities of IFN-α- and IL-4-induced dendritic cells (IFN-DC and IL4-DC) generated from blood monocytes of healthy donors and analyzed migration activity of IFN-DC from patients with brain tumors. In the presence of CCL19 chemokine, donor IFN-DC exhibited higher migration activity than IL4-DC, the expression of chemokine CCR7-receptor being similar in the two cell types. IFN-DC of patients with malignant gliomas were characterized by low chemotaxis in response to CCL19 and CCL21 stimulation despite a trend to higher expression of CCR7 in comparison with donor IFN-DC.
Costimulatory blockade with anti-CD40L monoclonal antibody (mAb) plus donor-specific splenocyte transfusion (DST) induces alloantigen-specific tolerance. We previously showed that lymphotoxin signaling in the fibroblastic reticular cell (FRC) stromal subset was required for proper lymph node structure and function during tolerization in murine cardiac transplantation. Here we focused on FRC functions and hypothesized that DST and anti-CD40L mAb-modulated FRC interactions with CD4 T cells in mice.
Mice were immunized or tolerized by DST or DST plus anti-CD40L mAb. Fibroblastic reticular cells were flow-sorted at different timepoints for characterization and in vitro proliferation and activation assays.
Fibroblastic reticular cells responded rapidly to DST by transcribing inflammatory cytokine and chemokine messenger RNAs, such as CXCL2, CXCL9, CXCL10, and CCL21. Conversely, anti-CD40L mAb inhibited FRC inflammatory responses. CD40 was expressed on FRC and agonistic anti-CD40 mAb activated FRC, which supported CD4 T-cell proliferation, whereas unstimulated FRC did not. Anti-CD3 mAb-activated CD4 T cells induced inflammatory cytokine and chemokine expressions by FRC, which were inhibited by anti-CD40L mAb. Thus, FRC phenotype was altered by interaction with CD4 T cells through CD40-CD40L, and activated FRC interacted directly with CD4 T cells to support T cell activation and proliferation in vitro.
Taken together, these results demonstrated that CD40 on FRC facilitated bidirectional communication between FRC and CD4 T cells via CD40-CD40L, thereby altering FRC gene expression of immune regulatory molecules. Because blockade of CD40-CD40L interactions results in tolerance in mice, identification of FRC-T cell interactions provides a new research target for tolerance induction.
The chemokine C receptor 7 (CCR7) is a G-protein-coupled heptahelical receptor (GPCR) that is expressed on a wide variety of cells including memory T cells, B cells, mature dendritic cells, and cancer cells. Activated by its ligands CCL19 or CCL21, CCR7 plays a major role in metastasis of cancer cells. Recent studies demonstrated the role of NF-κB and AP-1 transcription factors in addition to let-7 microRNA in CCR7 expression. Our ChIP assays further show the binding of Sp-1, Sp-3 and NFAT-1 transcription factors to their potential binding sites in the 1Kb promoter region with the later found to inhibit whilst Sp-1, and Sp-3 were found to stimulate CCR7 expression as demonstrated by transfection assays. On the other hand, in addition to the known let-7 regulation of CCR7, we found miR-21 to have a highly conserved target region in CCR7 3'UTR and to be significantly down-regulated during the course of dendritic cell maturation, allowing for high expression of CCR7.
MTG16, MTGR1 and ETO are nuclear transcriptional corepressors of the human ETO protein family. MTG16 is implicated in hematopoietic development and in controlling erythropoiesis/megakaryopoiesis. Furthermore, ETO homologue genes are 3'participants in leukemia fusions generated by chromosomal translocations responsible of hematopoietic dysregulation. We tried to identify structural and functional promoter elements of MTG16 and MTGR1 genes in order to find associations between their regulation and hematopoiesis.
5' deletion examinations and luciferase reporter gene studies indicated that a 492 bp sequence upstream of the transcription start site is essential for transcriptional activity by the MTG16 promoter. The TATA- and CCAAT-less promoter with a GC box close to the start site showed strong reporter activity when examined in erythroid/megakaryocytic cells. Mutation of an evolutionary conserved GATA -301 consensus binding site repressed promoter function. Furthermore, results from in vitro antibody-enhanced electrophoretic mobility shift assay and in vivo chromatin immunoprecipitation indicated binding of GATA-1 to the GATA -301 site. A role of GATA-1 was also supported by transfection of small interfering RNA, which diminished MTG16 expression. Furthermore, expression of the transcription factor HERP2, which represses GATA-1, produced strong inhibition of the MTG16 promoter reporter consistent with a role of GATA-1 in transcriptional activation. The TATA-less and CCAAT-less MTGR1 promoter retained most of the transcriptional activity within a -308 to -207 bp region with a GC-box-rich sequence containing multiple SP1 binding sites reminiscent of a housekeeping gene with constitutive expression. However, mutations of individual SP1 binding sites did not repress promoter function; multiple active SP1 binding sites may be required to safeguard constitutive MTGR1 transcriptional activity. The observed repression of MTG16/MTGR1 promoters by the leukemia associated AML1-ETO fusion gene may have a role in hematopoietic dysfunction of leukemia.
An evolutionary conserved GATA binding site is critical in transcriptional regulation of the MTG16 promoter. In contrast, the MTGR1 gene depends on a GC-box-rich sequence for transcriptional regulation and possible ubiquitous expression. Our results demonstrate that the ETO homologue promoters are regulated differently consistent with hematopoietic cell-type- specific expression and function.
The MTG (Myeloid Translocation Gene) proteins are a family of novel transcriptional corepressors. We report that MTG16a, a protein isoform encoded by the MTG16 gene deranged by the t (16; 21) in myeloid malignancies, is targeted to the nucleolus. The amino acid sequence necessary for nucleolar localization was mapped to the MTG16a N-terminal region. MTG16a, like MTG8, the nuclear corepressor deranged by the t (8; 21), is capable to interact with specific histone deacetylases (HDACs) suggesting that the protein may mediate silencing of nucleolar gene transcription. In addition, MTG16a is capable to form oligomers with other MTG proteins. As a consequence of the t (16; 21) the AML1 DNA-binding domain replaces the MTG16a N-terminal region. The AML1-MTG16 fusion protein is targeted to the nucleoplasm where it is capable to oligomerize with MTG16a and interact with HDAC1 and HDAC3. The deficiency of HDAC-containing complexes at nucleolar sites and the accumulation of HDAC-containing complexes at AML1-sites may be critical in the pathogenesis of t (16; 21) myeloid malignancies.
The AML1-CBFbeta transcription factor complex is essential for the definitive hematopoiesis of all lineages and is the most frequent target of chromosomal rearrangements in human leukemia. In the t(8;21) translocation associated with acute myeloid leukemia (AML), the AML1(CBFA2/PEBP2alphaB) gene is juxtaposed to the MTG8(ETO/CDR) gene. We show here that the resultant AML1-MTG8 gene product specifically and strongly interacts with an 85-kDa phosphoprotein. Molecular cloning of cDNA indicated that the AML1-MTG8-binding protein (MTGR1) is highly related to MTG8 and similar to Drosophila Nervy. Comparison of amino acid sequences among MTGR1, MTG8, and Nervy revealed four evolutionarily conserved regions (NHR1 to NHR4). Ectopic expression of AML1-MTG8 in L-G murine myeloid progenitor cells inhibits differentiation to mature neutrophils and induces cell proliferation in response to granulocyte colony-stimulating factor (G-CSF). Analysis with C-terminal deletion mutants of AML1-MTG8 indicated that the region of 51 residues (488 to 538), which contains NHR2, is essential for the induction of G-CSF-dependent cell proliferation. Immunoprecipitation analysis indicates that this region is required for AML1-MTG8 to form a stable complex with MTGR1. Overexpression of MTGR1 stimulates AML1-MTG8 to induce G-CSF-dependent proliferation of L-G cells and to interfere with AML1-dependent transcription. These results suggest that AML1-MTG8 could function as a complex with MTGR1 and that the complex might be important in promoting leukemogenesis.
Myeloid Translocation Gene, Related-1 (MTGR1) CBFA2T2 is a member of the Myeloid Translocation Gene (MTG) family of transcriptional corepressors. The remaining two family members, MTG8 (RUNX1T1) and MTG16 (CBFA2T3) are identified as targets of chromosomal translocations in acute myeloid leukemia (AML). Mtgr1(-/-) mice have defects in intestinal lineage allocation and wound healing. Moreover, these mice show signs of impaired intestinal stem cell function. Based on these phenotypes, we hypothesized that MTGR1 may influence tumorigenesis arising in an inflammatory background. We report that Mtgr1(-/-) mice were protected from tumorigenesis when injected with azoxymethane (AOM) and then subjected to repeated cycles of dextran sodium sulfate (DSS). Tumor cell proliferation was comparable, but Mtgr1(-/-) tumors had significantly higher apoptosis rates. These phenotypes were dependent on epithelial injury, the resultant inflammation, or a combination of both as there was no difference in aberrant crypt foci (ACF) or tumor burden when animals were treated with AOM as the sole agent. Gene expression analysis indicated that Mtgr1(-/-) tumors had significant upregulation of inflammatory networks, and immunohistochemistry (IHC) for immune cell subsets revealed a marked multilineage increase in infiltrates, consisting predominately of CD3(+) and natural killer T (NKT) cells as well as macrophages. Transplantation of wild type (WT) bone marrow into Mtgr1(-/-) mice, and the reciprocal transplant, did not alter the phenotype, ruling out an MTGR1 hematopoietic cell-autonomous mechanism. Our findings indicate that MTGR1 is required for efficient inflammatory carcinogenesis in this model, and implicate its dysfunction in colitis-associated carcinoma. This represents the first report functionally linking MTGR1 to intestinal tumorigenesis.
The leukaemia-associated eight-twenty-one (ETO) family members ETO, MTG16 (Myeloid Translocation Gene on chromosome 16) and MTGR1 (Myeloid Transforming Gene-Related protein1) are putative transcriptional repressor proteins, which form complexes with coregulatory nuclear corepressors such as SIN3 (SWI-Independent) and N-CoR (Nuclear receptor Co Repressor). In acute myeloid leukaemia (AML), fusion proteins involving the transcription factor AML1 and corepressors ETO or MTG16 are recurrently found. We investigated transcriptional repression by the ETO family members ETO and MTG16 with attention to the conserved Nervy Homology Regions (NHRs) and the interacting corepressors human SIN3B (hSIN3B) and N-CoR. Transcriptional repression was examined in a cell line by a GAL4-thymidine kinase luciferase reporter to which the corepressors were tethered through a binding domain. ETO- and MTG16-mediated repression was found to be independent of deletion of the oligomerization NHR2, but deletion of NHR4 and in particular combined deletion of NHR2 and NHR4 lowered the capacity for repression. An interaction was observed between the corepressors hSIN3B and N-CoR and these two proteins cooperated for transcriptional repression independent of co-transfected ETO and MTG16. Transcriptional repression mediated by ETO and MTG16 was only slightly strengthened by coexpression of hSIN3B or N-CoR and was dependent on HDAC activity. Our data indicate that ETO family member-mediated oligomerization and repression can be distinct events and that interaction between ETO family members and hSIN3B or N-CoR may not necessarily strengthen transcriptional repression.
SIN3 (SWI-Independent) is part of a transcriptional deacetylase complex, which generally mediates the formation of repressive chromatin. The purpose of this work was to study possible interactions between corepressors human SIN3B (hSIN3B) and the ETO homologues - ETO (eight twenty-one), MTG16 (myeloid-transforming gene 16) and MTGR1 (MTG-related protein 1). In addition, the subnuclear localization of the hSIN3B and the ETO homologues was also examined.
A ubiquitous expression of hSIN3B was observed in adult and fetal tissues. Results with both ectopically expressed proteins in COS-7 cells and endogeneous proteins in the K562 human erytholeukemia cell line demonstrated interactions between hSIN3B and ETO or MTG16 but not MTGR1. Furthermore, nuclear extract of primary placental cells showed complexes between hSIN3B and ETO. The interaction between hSIN3B and ETO required an intact amino-terminus of ETO and the NHR2 domain. A nucleolar localization of hSIN3B and all the ETO homologues was demonstrated upon overexpression in COS-7 cells, and confirmed for the endogeneously expressed proteins in K562 cells. However, hSIN3B did not colocalize or interact with the leukemia-associated AML1 -ETO.
Our data from protein-protein interactions and immunolocalization experiments support that hSIN3B is a potential member of a corepressor complex involving selective ETO homologues.
Canonical Wnt signaling is mediated by a molecular "switch" that regulates the transcriptional properties of the T-cell factor (TCF) family of DNA-binding proteins. Members of the myeloid translocation gene (MTG) family of transcriptional corepressors are frequently disrupted by chromosomal translocations in acute myeloid leukemia, whereas MTG16 may be inactivated in up to 40% of breast cancer and MTG8 is a candidate cancer gene in colorectal carcinoma. Genetic studies imply that this corepressor family may function in stem cells. Given that mice lacking Myeloid Translocation Gene Related-1 (Mtgr1) fail to maintain the secretory lineage in the small intestine, we surveyed transcription factors that might recruit Mtgr1 in intestinal stem cells or progenitor cells and found that MTG family members associate specifically with TCF4. Coexpression of beta-catenin disrupted the association between these corepressors and TCF4. Furthermore, when expressed in Xenopus embryos, MTG family members inhibited axis formation and impaired the ability of beta-catenin and XLef-1 to induce axis duplication, indicating that MTG family members act downstream of beta-catenin. Moreover, we found that c-Myc, a transcriptional target of the Wnt pathway, was overexpressed in the small intestines of mice lacking Mtgr1, thus linking inactivation of Mtgr1 to the activation of a potent oncogene.
The transcriptional repressor CBFA2T3 is a putative breast tumor suppressor. To define the role of CBFA2T3, we used a segment of this protein as bait in a yeast two-hybrid screen and identified a novel uncharacterized protein, ZNF652. In general, primary tumors and cancer cell lines showed lower expression of ZNF652 than normal tissues. Together with the location of this gene on the long arm of chromosome 17q, a region of frequent loss of heterozygosity in cancer, these results suggest a possible role of ZNF652 in tumorigenesis. In silico analysis of this protein revealed that it contains multiple classic zinc finger domains that are predicted to bind DNA. Coimmunoprecipitation assays showed that ZNF652 strongly interacts with CBFA2T3 and this interaction occurs through the COOH-terminal 109 amino acids of ZNF652. In contrast, there was a weak interaction of ZNF652 with CBFA2T1 and CBFA2T2, the other two members of this ETO family. Transcriptional reporter assays further confirmed the strength and selectivity of the ZNF652-CBFA2T3 interaction. The transcriptional repression of growth factor independent-1 (GFI-1), a previously characterized ETO effector zinc finger protein, was shown to be enhanced by CBFA2T1, but to a lesser extent by CBFA2T2 and CBFA2T3. We therefore suggest that each of the various gene effector zinc finger proteins may specifically interact with one or more of the ETO proteins to generate a defined range of transcriptional repressor complexes.
The eight-twenty-one (ETO) homologues, represented by ETO, myeloid transforming gene-related protein 1 (MTGR1) and myeloid transforming gene chromosome 16 (MTG16), are nuclear repressor proteins. ETO is part of the fusion protein acute myeloid leukaemia (AML)1-ETO, resulting from the translocation (8;21). Similarly, MTG16 is disrupted to become part of AML1/MTG16 in t(16;21). The aberrant expression of these chimeras could affect interplay between ETO homologues and contribute to the leukaemogenic process. We investigated possible interactions between the ETO homologues. Ectopic co-expression in COS-cells resulted in heterodimerisation of the various ETO homologues suggesting that they may co-operate. Similarly, the chimeric oncoprotein AML1-ETO interacted with both MTGR1 and MTG16. However, results from cell lines endogenously expressing more than one ETO homologue did not demonstrate co-precipitation. Results from IP-Western and size determination by gel filtration of deletion mutants expressed in COS-cells, indicated an important role of the HHR domain for oligomerisation. A role was also suggested for the Nervy domain in the homologue interactions. Our results suggest that ETO homologues can interact with each other as well as with AML1-ETO, although it is unclear as to what extent these interactions occur in vivo.
AML1-MTG8 fusion protein, which is produced from the rearranged gene formed between AML1 and MTG8 in myeloid leukemia with t(8;21) chromosomal translocation, plays an important role in the pathogenesis of leukemia. We previously showed that ectopically expressed AML1-MTG8 fusion protein is associated with an MTG8-like protein in the mouse myeloid precursor cell line L-G, and this association seemed to be required for AML1-MTG8 to stimulate proliferation. As a candidate cDNA for this MTG8-like protein, a 6.4 kb MTGR1 cDNA encoding human MTGR1b protein of 604 amino acids was isolated. Since this cDNA was shorter than the main mRNA (about 7.5 kb), the 5'-end of the MTGR1 cDNA was extended using Marathon Ready cDNA. When the newly obtained 5'-sequence was combined with the previous cDNA, the resultant MTGR1 cDNA (6995 bp), including exon 3 that the previous cDNA lacked, could encode MTGR1a protein of 575 amino acids. Transcripts of the MTGR1 gene were expressed ubiquitously in the human tissues and cell lines examined. PCR analyses of the cDNAs from human tissues showed the presence of various splicing variants with regard to the 5'-region including exons 1, 2 and 3. The MTGR1 gene consists of 14 exons and spans about 68 kb. The genomic structure of MTGR1 is highly similar to those of other MTG 8-family genes, MTG8 and MTG16. MTG16 was recently cloned from the translocation breakpoint of myeloid malignancies with t(16;21) chromosomal translocation.
MTG8 (HGMW-approved symbol CBFA2T1) was originally identified as one of the loci involved in the t(8;21)(q22;q22) of acute myeloid leukemia. We characterize two human MTG8-related genes, MTGR1 and MTGR2 (HGMW-approved symbols CBFA2T2 and CBFA2T3). The former is duplicated in mouse, one locus possibly being a retroposon. Multiple MTG8-related sequences are found in several vertebrate species, from fish to mammals, albeit not in a urodele. MTGR2 maps to 16q24 and, like MTG8 and MTGR1, is close to one of three loci encoding a syntrophin (dystrophin-associated proteins). Moreover, an alternative MTGR1 promoter/5' exon is contained within the alpha1-syntrophin locus. Thus, the two classes of genes may define novel paralogous groups. MTGR1 is expressed mainly in brain, while MTGR2 is expressed in the thymus and possibly in monocytes. Like MTG8, MTGR1 is transcribed into a number of isoforms due to alternative splicing of different 5' exons onto a common splice acceptor site. Comparison of the three predicted human MTG8-related polypeptides to their Drosophila counterpart (nervy) highlights four separate regions of sequence conservation that may correspond to distinct domains. The most NH2-terminal of these is proportionately more conserved among the human polypeptides, presumably due to specific structural/functional constraints.
Here, we report a high incidence of PAX5 abnormalities observed in 32/68 (47%) of patients with genetically unclassified childhood precursor B-cell acute lymphoblastic leukaemia (pre-B ALL). Various deletions, gains, mutations and rearrangements of PAX5 comprised 45%, 12%, 29% and 14%, respectively, of the abnormalities found. 28% of patients showed more than one abnormality of the gene, implying bi-allelic impairment of PAX5. Novel PAX5-RHOXF2, PAX5-ELK3 and PAX5-CBFA2T2 rearrangements, which lead to aberrant expression of PAX5, were also identified. PAX5 rearrangements demonstrated a complex mechanism of formation including concurrent duplications/deletions of PAX5 and its partner genes. Finally, the splice variant c.1013-2A>G, seen in two patients with loss of one PAX5 allele, was confirmed to be germ-line in one patient and somatic in the other. PAX5 alterations were also found to be clinically associated with a higher white blood cell count (P = 0·015). These findings contribute to the knowledge of PAX5 alterations and their role in the pathogenesis of pre-B ALL.
Notch signaling largely determines intestinal epithelial cell fate. High Notch activity drives progenitors toward absorptive enterocytes by repressing secretory differentiation programs, whereas low Notch permits secretory cell assignment. Myeloid translocation gene-related 1 (MTGR1) is a transcriptional corepressor in the myeloid translocation gene/Eight-Twenty-One family. Given that Mtgr1(-/-) mice have a dramatic reduction of intestinal epithelial secretory cells, we hypothesized that MTGR1 is a key repressor of Notch signaling. In support of this, transcriptome analysis of laser capture microdissected Mtgr1(-/-) intestinal crypts revealed Notch activation, and secretory markers Mucin2, Chromogranin A, and Growth factor-independent 1 (Gfi1) were down-regulated in Mtgr1(-/-) whole intestines and Mtgr1(-/-) enteroids. We demonstrate that MTGR1 is in a complex with Suppressor of Hairless Homolog, a key Notch effector, and represses Notch-induced Hairy/Enhancer of Split 1 activity. Moreover, pharmacologic Notch inhibition using a γ-secretase inhibitor (GSI) rescued the hyperproliferative baseline phenotype in the Mtgr1(-/-) intestine and increased production of goblet and enteroendocrine lineages in Mtgr1(-/-) mice. GSI increased Paneth cell production in wild-type mice but failed to do so in Mtgr1(-/-) mice. We determined that MTGR1 can interact with GFI1, a transcriptional corepressor required for Paneth cell differentiation, and repress GFI1 targets. Overall, the data suggest that MTGR1, a transcriptional corepressor well characterized in hematopoiesis, plays a critical role in intestinal lineage allocation.
Acute megakaryoblastic leukemia (AMKL) is a heterogeneous disease generally associated with poor prognosis. Gene expression profiles indicate the existence of distinct molecular subgroups, and several genetic alterations have been characterized in the past years, including the t(1;22)(p13;q13) and the trisomy 21 associated with GATA1 mutations. However, the majority of patients do not present with known mutations, and the limited access to primary patient leukemic cells impedes the efficient development of novel therapeutic strategies. In this study, using a xenotransplantation approach, we have modeled human pediatric AMKL in immunodeficient mice. Analysis of high-throughput RNA sequencing identified recurrent fusion genes defining new molecular subgroups. One subgroup of patients presented with MLL or NUP98 fusion genes leading to up-regulation of the HOX A cluster genes. A novel CBFA2T3-GLIS2 fusion gene resulting from a cryptic inversion of chromosome 16 was identified in another subgroup of 31% of non-Down syndrome AMKL and strongly associated with a gene expression signature of Hedgehog pathway activation. These molecular data provide useful markers for the diagnosis and follow up of patients. Finally, we show that AMKL xenograft models constitute a relevant in vivo preclinical screening platform to validate the efficacy of novel therapies such as Aurora A kinase inhibitors.
OPLS discriminant analysis (OPLS-DA) was successfully applied for the selection of a limited number of gene transcripts necessary to discriminate PTPN11 and RAS mutated cells in acute lymphoblastic leukaemia (ALL) patients. The original set of 273 variables with VIP (1) values higher than 2.0 in the OPLS-DA model could be further reduced to 200 by elimination of less informative variables in the PCA class models adopted for SIMCA classification. The above 200 transcripts not only achieve a satisfactory discrimination accuracy between PTPN11 and RAS mutated cells but also indicate clearly that wild type samples belong to none of the mutated class models. In this list it was possible to identify candidate genes that could be involved in the molecular mechanisms discriminating PTPN11 and RAS mutations in ALL. Among them CBFA2T2, a member of the "ETO" family, is known because of its homology and association with the product of RUNX1-CBFA2T1 gene fusion generated by t(8;21) translocation, one frequent cause of acute myeloid leukemia.
The TAL1 (or SCL) gene, originally discovered through its involvement by a chromosomal translocation in T-cell acute lymphoblastic leukemia, encodes a basic helix-loop-helix (bHLH) transcription factor essential for hematopoietic and vascular development. To identify its interaction partners, we expressed a tandem epitope-tagged protein in murine erythroleukemia (MEL) cells and characterized affinity-purified Tal1-containing complexes by liquid chromatography-tandem mass spectrometry analysis. In addition to known interacting proteins, two proteins related to the Eight-Twenty-One (ETO) corepressor, Eto2/Mtg16 and Mtgr1, were identified from the peptide fragments analyzed. Tal1 interaction with Eto2 and Mtgr1 was verified by coimmunoprecipitation analysis in Tal1, Eto2-, and Mtgr1-transfected COS-7 cells, MEL cells expressing V5 epitope-tagged Tal1 protein, and non-transfected MEL cells. Mapping analysis with Gal4 fusion proteins demonstrated a requirement for the bHLH domain of Tal1 and TAF110 domain of Eto2 for their interaction, and transient transfection and glutathione S-transferase pull-down analysis showed that Mtgr1 and Eto2 enhanced the other's association with Tal1. Enforced expression of Eto2 in differentiating MEL cells inhibited the promoter of the Protein 4.2 (P4.2) gene, a direct target of TAL1 in erythroid progenitors, and transduction of Eto2 and Mtgr1 augmented Tal1-mediated gene repression. Finally, chromatin immunoprecipitation analysis revealed that Eto2 occupancy of the P4.2 promoter in MEL cells decreased with differentiation, in parallel with a decline in Eto2 protein abundance. These results identify Eto2 and Mtgr1 as authentic interaction partners of Tal1 and suggest they act as heteromeric corepressors of this bHLH transcription factor during erythroid differentiation.
The sequential steps of neurogenesis are characterized by highly choreographed changes in transcription factor activity. In contrast to the well-studied mechanisms of transcription factor activation during neurogenesis, much less is understood regarding how such activity is terminated. We previously showed that MTGR1, a member of the MTG family of transcriptional repressors, is strongly induced by a proneural basic helix-loop-helix transcription factor, NEUROG2 in developing nervous system. In this study, we describe a novel feedback regulation of NEUROG2 activity by MTGR1. We show that MTGR1 physically interacts with NEUROG2 and represses transcriptional activity of NEUROG2. MTGR1 also prevents DNA binding of the NEUROG2/E47 complex. In addition, we provide evidence that proper termination of NEUROG2 activity by MTGR1 is necessary for normal progression of neurogenesis in the developing spinal cord. These results highlight the importance of feedback regulation of proneural gene activity in neurodevelopment.
Myeloid translocation gene (MTG) proteins are transcriptional repressors that are highly conserved across species. We studied the expression of three members of this gene family, MTGR1, MTG8, and MTG16 in developing mouse central nervous system by in situ hybridization. All of these genes are detected as early as embryonic day 11.5. Because these genes are known to be induced by proneural genes during neurogenesis, we analyzed the expression of MTG genes in relation to two proneural genes, Neurog2 (also known as Ngn2 or Neurogenin 2) and Ascl1 (also known as Mash1). While MTGR1 are generally expressed in regions that also express Neurog2, MTG8 and MTG16 expression is associated more tightly with that of Ascl1-expressing neural progenitor cells. These results suggest the possibility that expression of MTG genes is differentially controlled by specific proneural genes during neurogenesis.
Integrins are transmembrane receptors that promote neurite growth and guidance. To identify regulators of integrin-dependent neurite outgrowth, here we used two loss of function genetic screens in SH-SY5Y neuroblastoma cells. First, we screened a genome-wide retroviral library of genetic suppressor elements (GSEs). Among the many genes identified in the GSE screen, we isolated the hematopoetic transcriptional factor MTGR1 (myeloid translocation gene-related protein-1). Treatment of SH-SY5Y cells with MTGR1 siRNA enhanced neurite outgrowth and concurrently increased expression of GAP-43, a protein linked to neurite outgrowth. Second, we transduced SH-SY5Y with a genome-wide GFP-labeled lentiviral siRNA library, which expressed 40,000 independent siRNAs targeting 8500 human genes. From this screen we isolated GFI1 (growth factor independence-1), which, like MTGR1, is a member of the myeloid translocation gene on 8q22 (MTG8)/ETO protein complex of nuclear repressor proteins. These results reveal novel contributions of MTGR1 and GFI1 to the regulation of neurite outgrowth and identify novel repressors of integrin-dependent neurite outgrowth.
p19(ARF) is a tumor suppressor that is frequently deleted in human cancer. It lies at chromosome 9p21 and shares exons 2 and 3 with p16(ink4a), which is also inactivated by these cancer-associated deletions. The "canonical pathway" by which p19(ARF) is thought to suppress tumorigenesis through activation of the p53 tumor suppressor. In response to hyperproliferative signals, such as expression of oncogenes, p19(ARF) is induced and binds to the MDM2 ubiquitin ligase, sequestering it in the nucleolus to allow the accumulation of p53. However, p19(ARF) also has MDM2 and p53 independent functions. In human colon cancer, p19(ARF) is only rarely deleted, but it is more frequently silenced by DNA promoter methylation. Here we show that inactivation of p19(ARF) in mice increases the number of cycling cells in the crypts of the colonic epithelium. Moreover, inactivation of p19(ARF) exacerbated the ulceration of the colonic epithelium caused by dextran sodium sulfate (DSS). These effects were similar to those observed in mice lacking myeloid translocation gene-related-1 (Mtgr1), and mice lacking both of these genes showed an even greater sensitivity to DSS. Surprisingly, inactivation of p19(ARF) restored the loss of the secretory lineage in mice deficient in Mtgr1, suggesting an additional role for p19(ARF) in the small intestinal epithelium.
The disruption of homeostasis between proliferation and apoptosis in the colonic epithelium contributes to the pathogenesis of human ulcerative colitis. Mice lacking the transcriptional corepressor myeloid translocation gene related-1 (Mtgr1) display impaired secretory cell lineage development in the small intestine and an increase in proliferation in the crypts of both the small and large intestines. Despite the increase in proliferating cells, the colons of Mtgr1-null mice have a normal cell lineage distribution and normal architecture. To uncover colonic phenotypes in Mtgr1(-/-) mice, we stressed the colonic epithelium with low-molecular-weight dextran sodium sulfate (DSS), which is a well-studied model of murine ulcerative colitis.
Mtgr1-null mice were given 3% DSS in their drinking water for 4 days and the colons examined at various times thereafter for ulceration and for changes in proliferation and apoptosis.
Treatment with DSS resulted in severe colitis in Mtgr1(-/-) mice, at least partially due to increased epithelial apoptosis rates. Transplantation of wild-type and Mtgr1-null bone marrow into irradiated wild-type mice demonstrated that the severe DSS-induced ulceration seen in Mtgr1-null mice was due to a colonic, rather than a hematologic, defect. Importantly, the epithelium of DSS-treated Mtgr1-null mice failed to completely regenerate, showing changes consistent with chronic colitis, even 10 weeks after a single DSS treatment.
These findings suggest that Mtgr1 has an important role in crypt survival and regeneration after colonic epithelial ulceration.
Two members of the MTG/ETO family of transcriptional corepressors, MTG8 and MTG16, are disrupted by chromosomal translocations in up to 15% of acute myeloid leukemia cases. The third family member, MTGR1, was identified as a factor that associates with the t(8;21) fusion protein RUNX1-MTG8. We demonstrate that Mtgr1 associates with mSin3A, N-CoR, and histone deacetylase 3 and that when tethered to DNA, Mtgr1 represses transcription, suggesting that Mtgr1 also acts as a transcriptional corepressor. To define the biological function of Mtgr1, we created Mtgr1-null mice. These mice are proportionally smaller than their littermates during embryogenesis and throughout their life span but otherwise develop normally. However, these mice display a progressive reduction in the secretory epithelial cell lineage in the small intestine. This is not due to the loss of small intestinal progenitor cells expressing Gfi1, which is required for the formation of goblet and Paneth cells, implying that loss of Mtgr1 impairs the maturation of secretory cells in the small intestine.
The Eight twenty-one (ETO) homologues are nuclear repressor proteins including ETO, myeloid-transforming gene-related protein 1 (MTGR1), and myeloid-transforming gene chromosome 16 (MTG16). ETO and MTG16 are both part of fusion proteins resulting from chromosomal translocations associated with acute myeloid leukemia. Expression of these chimeras results in a differentiation block that contributes to the onset of leukemia. In order to elucidate the relation between the ETO homologues and hematopoietic differentiation, we determined the expression of the homologues during differentiation of leukemic and normal hematopoietic cells. Our results showed MTGR1 and MTG16 to be ubiquitously expressed in leukemic cell lines, whereas expression of ETO was observed only in an erythroleukemic cell line. The MTGR1 and MTG16 proteins decreased during all trans-retinoic acid-, but not vitamin D(3)-induced differentiation of leukemic cells. The reduction seemed to reflect a decrease in transcript levels as well as in protein stability. MTGR1 transcripts were ubiquitously expressed in human bone marrow cells. The MTG16 transcripts of CD34(+) progenitor cells were rapidly downregulated by cytokine-induced differentiation into myeloid or erythroid lineages. ETO transcripts, present at very low abundance in CD34(+) progenitor cells, were transiently upregulated during erythroid differentiation. In conclusion, the differential expression of the ETO homologues suggests that they may have a potential role in hematopoietic differentiation.
The proneural basic helix-loop-helix (bHLH) proteins promote neurogenesis by inducing changes in gene expression required for neuronal differentiation. Here we characterize one aspect of this differentiation program by analyzing a small family of putative corepressors encoded by MTG genes. We show that MTG genes are expressed sequentially during neurogenesis as cells undergo neuronal differentiation in both the chick spinal cord and in the Xenopus primary nervous system. Using in ovo electroporation, we show that misexpressing wild-type forms of MTG proteins in the developing chick spinal cord does not detectably alter neuronal differentiation. By contrast, the number of differentiated neurons is markedly reduced when a putative dominant-negative mutant of the MTG proteins is expressed in neural precursors in a manner that can be rescued by wild-type MTGR1. Together, these results suggest that MTG family members act downstream of proneural proteins, presumably as corepressors, to promote neuronal differentiation.
Differentiated CD4(+) T cells preserve plasticity under various conditions. However, the stability of Th1 cells is unclear, as is whether Th1 cells can convert into Th17 cells and thereby contribute to the generation of IFN-γ(+) IL-17(+) CD4(+) T cells, the number of which correlates with severity of colitis. We investigated whether IFN-γ(+) Th1 cells can convert into Th17 cells under intestinal inflammation and the mechanisms involved. IFN-γ(Thy1.1+) Th1 cells were generated by culturing naïve CD4(+) T cells from IFN-γ(Thy1.1) CBir1 TCR-Tg reporter mice, whose TCR is specific for an immunodominant microbiota antigen, CBir1 flagellin, under Th1 polarizing conditions. IFN-γ(Thy1.1+) Th1 cells induced colitis in Rag(-/-) mice after adoptive transfer and converted into IL-17(+) Th17, but not Foxp3(+) Treg cells in the inflamed intestines. TGF-β and IL-6, but not IL-1β and IL-23, regulated Th1 conversion into Th17 cells. TGF-β induction of transcriptional factor Runx1 is crucial for the conversion, since silencing Runx1 by siRNA inhibited Th1 conversion into Th17 cells. Furthermore, TGF-β enhanced histone H3K9 acetylation but inhibited H3K9 trimethylation of Runx1- and ROR-γt-binding sites on il-17 or rorc gene in Th1 cells. We conclude that Th1 cells convert into Th17 cells under inflammatory conditions in intestines, which is possibly mediated by TGF-β induction of Runx1.
Cooperative assemblies of transcription factors (TFs) on target gene enhancers coordinate cell proliferation, fate specification, and differentiation through precise and complicated transcriptional mechanisms. Chemical modifications, such as phosphorylation, of TFs induced by cell signaling further modulate the dynamic cooperativity of TFs. In this study, we found that various Ets1-containing TF-DNA complexes respond differently to calcium-induced phosphorylation of Ets1, which is known to inhibit Ets1-DNA binding. Crystallographic analysis of a complex comprising Ets1, Runx1, and CBFβ at the TCRα enhancer revealed that Ets1 acquires robust binding stability in the Runx1 and DNA-complexed state, via allosteric mechanisms. This allows phosphorylated Ets1 to be retained at the TCRα enhancer with Runx1, in contrast to other Ets1 target gene enhancers including mb-1 and stromelysin-1. This study provides a structure-based model for cell-signaling-dependent regulation of target genes, mediated via chemical modification of TFs.
Core-binding factor β (Cbfβ) is a subunit of the Cbf family of heterodimeric transcription factors, which plays a critical role in skeletal development through its interaction with the Cbfα subunits, also known as Runt-related transcription factors (Runxs). However, the mechanism by which Cbfβ regulates cartilage and bone development remains unclear. Existing Cbfβ-deficient mouse models cannot specify the role of Cbfβ in skeletal cell lineage. Herein, we sought to specifically address the role of Cbfβ in cartilage and bone development by using a conditional knockout (CKO) approach. A mesenchymal-specific Cbfβ CKO mouse model was generated by using the Dermo1-Cre mouse line to specifically delete Cbfβ in mesenchymal stem cells, which give rise to osteoblasts and chondrocytes. Surprisingly, the mutant mice had under-developed larynx and tracheal cartilage, causing alveolus defects that led to death shortly after birth from suffocation. Also, the mutant mice exhibited severe skeletal deformities from defective intramembranous and endochondral ossification, owing to delayed chondrocyte maturation and impaired osteoblast differentiation. Almost all bones of the mutant mice, including the calvariae, vertebrae, tibiae, femurs, ribs, limbs and sternums were defective. Importantly, we showed that Cbfβ was expressed throughout the skeleton during both embryonic and postnatal development, which explains the multiple-skeletal defects observed in the mutant mice. Consistently, Cbfβ deficiency impaired both chondrocyte proliferation and hypertrophy zone hypertrophy during growth-plate development in the long bones of mutant mice. Notably, Cbfβ, Runx1 and Runx2 displayed different expression patterns in the growth plates of the wild-type mice, indicating that Cbfβ/Runx1 complex and Cbfβ/Runx2 complex may regulate chondrocyte proliferation and hypertrophy, respectively, in a spatial and temporal manner. Cbfβ deletion in the mesenchymal progenitors affected bone development by dramatically down-regulating Collagen X (Col X) and Osterix (Osx) but had a dispensable effect on osteoclast development. Collectively, the results demonstrate that Cbfβ mediates cartilage and bone development by interacting with Runx1 and Runx2 to regulate the expressions of Col X and Osx for chondrocyte and osteoblast development. These findings not only reveal a critical role for Cbfβ in cartilage and bone development but also facilitate the design of novel therapeutic approaches for skeletal diseases.
It has been shown that rapamycin is able to significantly increase the expression of FoxP3 and suppress activity in induced Treg (iTreg) cells in vivo and in vitro. CD39 is a newly determined Treg marker that relates to cell suppression. Runx1, a regulator of FoxP3, controls the expression of adenosine deaminase (ADA) gene, which is found recently in the downstream of CD39 pathway in trophoblast cells. Whether rapamycin would influence CD39 pathway and regulate the expression of Runx1 remains to be determined. The addition of rapamycin to human CD4(+) naïve cells in the presence of IL-2, TGF-β promotes the expression of FoxP3. In this paper, we found that CD39 positively correlated with the FoxP3 expression in iTreg cells. Rapamycin induced iTreg cells showed a stronger CD39/Runx1 expression with the enhanced suppressive function. These data suggested that CD39 expression was involved in iTreg generation and the enhanced suppressive ability of rapamycin induced Treg was partly due to Runx1 pathway. We conclude that rapamycin favors CD39/Runx1 expression in human iTreg and provides a novel insight into the mechanisms of iTreg generation enhanced by rapamycin.
Runx1 and Cbfβ are critical for the establishment of definitive hematopoiesis and are implicated in leukemic transformation. Despite the absolute requirements for these factors in the development of hematopoietic stem cells and lymphocytes, their roles in the development of bone marrow progenitor subsets have not been defined. Here, we demonstrate that Cbfβ is essential for the development of Flt3(+) macrophage-dendritic cell (DC) progenitors in the bone marrow and all DC subsets in the periphery. Besides the loss of DC progenitors, pan-hematopoietic Cbfb-deficient mice also lack CD105(+) erythroid progenitors, leading to severe anemia at 3 to 4 months of age. Instead, Cbfb deficiency results in aberrant progenitor differentiation toward granulocyte-macrophage progenitors (GMPs), resulting in a myeloproliferative phenotype with accumulation of GMPs in the periphery and cellular infiltration of the liver. Expression of the transcription factor Irf8 is severely reduced in Cbfb-deficient progenitors, and overexpression of Irf8 restors DC differentiation. These results demonstrate that Runx proteins and Cbfβ restrict granulocyte lineage commitment to facilitate multilineage hematopoietic differentiation and thus identify their novel tumor suppressor function in myeloid leukemia.
A major barrier to the elimination of HIV-1 infection is the presence of a pool of long-lived, latently infected CD4+ memory T-cells. The search for treatments to re-activate latent HIV to aid in clearance is hindered by the incomplete understanding of the mechanisms that lead to transcriptional silencing of viral gene expression in host cells. Here we identify a previously unknown role for RUNX1 in HIV-1 transcriptional latency. The RUNX proteins, in combination with the co-factor CBF-β, are critical transcriptional regulators in T-cells. RUNX1 strongly modulates CD4 expression and contributes to CD4+ T-cell function. We show that RUNX1 can bind DNA sequences within the HIV-1 LTR and that this binding represses transcription. Using patient samples we show a negative correlation between RUNX1 expression and viral load. Furthermore, we find that pharmacologic inhibition of RUNX1 by a small molecule inhibitor, Ro5-3335, synergizes with the histone deacetylase (HDAC) inhibitor SAHA (Vorinostat) to enhance the activation of latent HIV-1 in both cell lines and PBMCs from patients. Our findings indicate that RUNX1 and CBF-β cooperate in cells to modulate HIV-1 replication, identifying for the first time RUNX1 as a cellular factor involved in HIV-1 latency. This work highlights the therapeutic potential of inhibitors of RUNX1 to re-activate virus and aid in clearance of HIV-1.
Runx1 is required for definitive hematopoiesis and is well known for its frequent chromosomal translocations and point mutations in leukemia. Runx1 regulates a variety of genes via Ets1 activation on an Ets1•Runx1 composite DNA sequence. The structural basis of such regulation remains unresolved. To address this problem, we determined the crystal structure of the ternary complex containing Runx1(1-242) and Ets1(296-441) bound to T-cell receptor alpha (TCRα) enhancer DNA. In the crystal, an Ets1-interacting domain of Runx1 is bound to the Ets1 DNA-binding domain and displaced an entire autoinhibitory module of Ets1, revealing a novel mechanism of Ets1 activation. The DNA-binding and transcriptional studies with a variety of structure-guided Runx1 mutants confirmed a critical role of direct Ets1•Runx1 interaction in Ets1 activation. More importantly, the discovered mechanism provides a plausible explanation for how the Ets1•Runx1 interaction effectively activates not only a wild-type Ets1, but also a highly inhibited phosphorylated form of Ets1.
Vif is a lentiviral accessory protein that regulates viral infectivity in part by inducing proteasomal degradation of APOBEC3G (A3G). Recently, CBFβ was found to facilitate Vif-dependent degradation of A3G. However, the exact role of CBFβ remains unclear. Several studies noted reduced Vif expression in CBFβ knockdown cells while others saw no significant impact of CBFβ on Vif stability. Here, we confirmed that CBFβ increases Vif steady-state levels. CBFβ affected expression of neither viral Gag nor Vpu protein, indicating that CBFβ regulates Vif expression posttranscriptionally. Kinetic studies revealed effects of CBFβ on both metabolic stability and the rate of Vif biosynthesis. These effects were dependent on the ability of CBFβ to interact with Vif. Importantly, at comparable Vif levels, CBFβ further enhanced A3G degradation, suggesting that CBFβ facilitates A3G degradation by increasing the levels of Vif and by independently augmenting the ability of Vif to target A3G for degradation. CBFβ also increased expression of RUNX1 by enhancing RUNX1 biosynthesis. Unlike Vif, however, CBFβ had no detectable effect on RUNX1 metabolic stability. We propose that CBFβ acts as a chaperone to stabilize Vif during and after synthesis and to facilitate interaction of Vif with cellular cofactors required for the efficient degradation of A3G.
In this study, we show that CBFβ has a profound effect on the expression of the HIV-1 infectivity factor Vif and the cellular transcription factor RUNX1, two proteins that physically interact with CBFβ. Kinetic studies revealed that CBFβ increases the rate of Vif and RUNX1 biosynthesis at the level of translation. Mutants of Vif unable to physically interact with CBFβ were nonresponsive to CBFβ. Our data suggest that CBFβ exerts a chaperone-like activity (i) to minimize the production of defective ribosomal products (DRiPs) by binding to nascent protein to prevent premature termination and (ii) to stabilize mature protein conformation to ensure proper function of Vif and RUNX1. Thus, we identified a novel mechanism of protein regulation that affects both viral and cellular factors and thus has broad implications beyond the immediate HIV field.
RUNX1/CBFβ (core binding factor [CBF]) is a heterodimeric transcription factor complex that is frequently involved in chromosomal translocations, point mutations, or deletions in acute leukemia. The mixed lineage leukemia (MLL) gene is also frequently involved in chromosomal translocations or partial tandem duplication in acute leukemia. The MLL protein interacts with RUNX1 and prevents RUNX1 from ubiquitin-mediated degradation. RUNX1/CBFβ recruits MLL to regulate downstream target genes. However, the functional consequence of MLL fusions on RUNX1/CBFβ activity has not been fully understood. In this report, we show that MLL fusion proteins and the N-terminal MLL portion of MLL fusions downregulate RUNX1 and CBFβ protein expression via the MLL CXXC domain and flanking regions. We confirmed this finding in Mll-Af9 knock-in mice and human M4/M5 acute myeloid leukemia (AML) cell lines, with or without MLL translocations, showing that MLL translocations cause a hypomorph phenotype of RUNX1/CBFβ. Overexpression of RUNX1 inhibits the development of AML in Mll-Af9 knock-in mice; conversely, further reducing Runx1/Cbfβ levels accelerates MLL-AF9-mediated AML in bone marrow transplantation assays. These data reveal a newly defined negative regulation of RUNX1/CBFβ by MLL fusion proteins and suggest that targeting RUNX1/CBFβ levels may be a potential therapy for MLLs.
The human immunodeficiency virus (HIV)-1 protein Vif has a central role in the neutralization of host innate defences by hijacking cellular proteasomal degradation pathways to subvert the antiviral activity of host restriction factors; however, the underlying mechanism by which Vif achieves this remains unclear. Here we report a crystal structure of the Vif-CBF-β-CUL5-ELOB-ELOC complex. The structure reveals that Vif, by means of two domains, organizes formation of the pentameric complex by interacting with CBF-β, CUL5 and ELOC. The larger domain (α/β domain) of Vif binds to the same side of CBF-β as RUNX1, indicating that Vif and RUNX1 are exclusive for CBF-β binding. Interactions of the smaller domain (α-domain) of Vif with ELOC and CUL5 are cooperative and mimic those of SOCS2 with the latter two proteins. A unique zinc-finger motif of Vif, which is located between the two Vif domains, makes no contacts with the other proteins but stabilizes the conformation of the α-domain, which may be important for Vif-CUL5 interaction. Together, our data reveal the structural basis for Vif hijacking of the CBF-β and CUL5 E3 ligase complex, laying a foundation for rational design of novel anti-HIV drugs.
Rearrangements involving the RUNX1 gene account for approximately 15% of balanced translocations in therapy-related acute myeloid leukemia (t-AML) patients and are one of the most common genetic abnormalities observed in t-AML. Drugs targeting the topoisomerase II (TOP2) enzyme are implicated in t-AML; however, the mechanism is not well understood and to date a single RUNX1-RUNX1T1 t-AML breakpoint junction sequence has been published. Here we report an additional five breakpoint junction sequences from t-AML patients with the RUNX1- RUNX1T1 translocation. Using a leukemia cell line model, we show that TOP2 beta (TOP2B) is required for induction of RUNX1 chromosomal breaks by the TOP2 poison etoposide and that, while TOP2 alpha (TOP2A) and TOP2B proteins are both present on RUNX1 and RUNX1T1 chromatin, only the TOP2B enrichment reached significance following etoposide exposure at a region on RUNX1 where translocations occur. Furthermore, we demonstrate that TOP2B influences the separation between RUNX1 and two translocation partners (RUNX1T1 and EVI) in the nucleus of lymphoid cells. Specifically, we identified a TOP2B-dependent increase in the number of nuclei displaying juxtaposed RUNX1 and RUNX1T1 loci following etoposide treatment.
The genetics of acute lymphoblastic leukemia are becoming well understood and the incidence of individual chromosomal abnormalities varies considerably with age. Cytogenetics provide reliable risk stratification for treatment: high hyperdiploidy and ETV6-RUNX1 are good risk, whereas BCR-ABL1, MLL rearrangements, and hypodiploidy are poor risk. Nevertheless, some patients within the good- and intermediate-risk groups will unpredictably relapse. With advancing technologies in array-based approaches (single nucleotide polymorphism arrays) and next-generation sequencing to study the genome, increasing numbers of new genetic changes are being discovered. These include deletions of B-cell differentiation and cell cycle control genes, as well as mutations of genes in key signaling pathways. Their associations and interactions with established cytogenetic subgroups and with each other are becoming elucidated. Whether they have a link to outcome is the most important factor for refinement of risk factors in relation to clinical trials. For several newly identified abnormalities, including intrachromosomal amplification of chromosome 21 (iAMP21), that are associated with a poor prognosis with standard therapy, appropriately modified treatment has significantly improved outcome. After the successful use of tyrosine kinase inhibitors in the treatment of BCR-ABL1-positive acute lymphoblastic leukemia, patients with alternative ABL1 translocations and rearrangements involving PDGFRB may benefit from treatment with tyrosine kinase inhibitors. Other aberrations, for example, CRLF2 overexpression and JAK2 mutations, are also providing potential novel therapeutic targets with the prospect of reduced toxicity.
Glycogen synthase kinase (GSK)-3β plays an important role in osteoblastogenesis by regulating the Wnt/β-catenin signaling pathway. Therefore, we investigated whether GSK-3β deficiency affects bone development and regeneration using mice heterozygously deficient for GSK-3β (GSK-3β(+/-)). The amounts of β-catenin, c-Myc, cyclin D1, and runt-related transcription factor-2 (Runx2) in the bone marrow cells of GSK-3β(+/-) mice were significantly increased compared with those of wild-type mice, indicating that Wnt/β-catenin signals were enhanced in GSK-3β(+/-) mice. Microcomputed tomography of the distal femoral metaphyses demonstrated that the volumes of both the cortical and trabecular bones were increased in GSK-3β(+/-) mice compared with those in wild-type mice. Subsequently, to investigate the effect of GSK-3β deficiency on bone regeneration, we established a partial bone defect in the femur and observed new bone at 14 days after surgery. The volume and mineral density of the new bone were significantly higher in GSK-3β(+/-) mice than those in wild-type mice. These results suggest that bone formation and regeneration in vivo are accelerated by inhibition of GSK-3β, probably through activation of the Wnt/β-catenin signaling pathway.
Different mechanisms for CBFβ-MYH11 function in acute myeloid leukemia with inv(16) have been proposed such as tethering of RUNX1 outside the nucleus, interference with transcription factor complex assembly and recruitment of histone deacetylases, all resulting in transcriptional repression of RUNX1 target genes. Here, through genome-wide CBFβ-MYH11-binding site analysis and quantitative interaction proteomics, we found that CBFβ-MYH11 localizes to RUNX1 occupied promoters, where it interacts with TAL1, FLI1 and TBP-associated factors (TAFs) in the context of the hematopoietic transcription factors ERG, GATA2 and PU.1/SPI1 and the coregulators EP300 and HDAC1. Transcriptional analysis revealed that upon fusion protein knockdown, a small subset of the CBFβ-MYH11 target genes show increased expression, confirming a role in transcriptional repression. However, the majority of CBFβ-MYH11 target genes, including genes implicated in hematopoietic stem cell self-renewal such as ID1, LMO1 and JAG1, are actively transcribed and repressed upon fusion protein knockdown. Together these results suggest an essential role for CBFβ-MYH11 in regulating the expression of genes involved in maintaining a stem cell phenotype.
While transforming growth factor β (TGFβ) signaling plays a critical role in chondrocyte metabolism, the TGFβ signaling pathways and target genes involved in cartilage homeostasis and the development of osteoarthritis (OA) remain unclear. Using an in vitro cell culture method and an in vivo mouse genetic approach, we undertook this study to investigate TGFβ signaling in chondrocytes and to determine whether Mmp13 and Adamts5 are critical downstream target genes of TGFβ signaling.
TGFβ receptor type II (TGFβRII)-conditional knockout (KO) (TGFβRII(Col2ER)) mice were generated by breeding TGFβRII(flox/flox) mice with Col2-CreER-transgenic mice. Histologic, histomorphometric, and gene expression analyses were performed. In vitro TGFβ signaling studies were performed using chondrogenic rat chondrosarcoma cells. To determine whether Mmp13 and Adamts5 are critical downstream target genes of TGFβ signaling, TGFβRII/matrix metalloproteinase 13 (MMP-13)- and TGFβRII/ADAMTS-5-double-KO mice were generated and analyzed.
Inhibition of TGFβ signaling (deletion of the Tgfbr2 gene in chondrocytes) resulted in up-regulation of Runx2, Mmp13, and Adamts5 expression in articular cartilage tissue and progressive OA development in TGFβRII(Col2ER) mice. Deletion of the Mmp13 or Adamts5 gene significantly ameliorated the OA-like phenotype induced by the loss of TGFβ signaling. Treatment of TGFβRII(Col2ER) mice with an MMP-13 inhibitor also slowed OA progression.
Mmp13 and Adamts5 are critical downstream target genes involved in the TGFβ signaling pathway during the development of OA.
RUNX1 is generally considered a tumor suppressor in myeloid neoplasms. Inactivating RUNX1 mutations have frequently been found in patients with myelodysplastic syndrome (MDS) and cytogenetically normal acute myeloid leukemia (AML). However, no somatic RUNX1 alteration was found in AMLs with leukemogenic fusion proteins, such as core-binding factor (CBF) leukemia and MLL fusion leukemia, raising the possibility that RUNX1 could actually promote the growth of these leukemia cells. Using normal human cord blood cells and those expressing leukemogenic fusion proteins, we discovered a dual role of RUNX1 in myeloid leukemogenesis. RUNX1 overexpression inhibited the growth of normal cord blood cells by inducing myeloid differentiation, whereas a certain level of RUNX1 activity was required for the growth of AML1-ETO and MLL-AF9 cells. Using a mouse genetic model, we also showed that the combined loss of Runx1/Cbfb inhibited leukemia development induced by MLL-AF9. RUNX2 could compensate for the loss of RUNX1. The survival effect of RUNX1 was mediated by BCL2 in MLL fusion leukemia. Our study unveiled an unexpected prosurvival role for RUNX1 in myeloid leukemogenesis. Inhibiting RUNX1 activity rather than enhancing it could be a promising therapeutic strategy for AMLs with leukemogenic fusion proteins.
The transcription factor Runx1 is essential for the formation of yolk sac-derived erythroid/myeloid progenitors (EMPs) and hematopoietic stem cells (HSCs) from hemogenic endothelium during embryogenesis. However, long-term repopulating HSCs (LT-HSCs) persist when Runx1 is conditionally deleted in fetal liver cells, demonstrating that the requirement for Runx1 changes over time. To define more precisely when Runx1 transitions from an essential factor to a homeostatic regulator of EMPs and HSCs, and whether that transition requires fetal liver colonization, we performed conditional, timed deletions of Runx1 between E7.5 and E13.5. We determined that Runx1 loss reduces the formation or function of EMPs up through E10.5. The Runx1 requirement in HSCs ends later, as deletion up to E11.5 eliminates HSCs. At E11.5, there is an abrupt transition to Runx1 independence in at least a subset of HSCs that does not require fetal liver colonization. The transition to Runx1 independence in EMPs is not mediated by other core binding factors (Runx2 and/or Runx3); however, deleting the common non-DNA-binding β subunit (CBFβ) severely compromises LT-HSC function. Hence, the requirements for Runx1 in EMP and HSC formation are temporally distinct, and LT-HSC function is highly reliant on continued core binding factor activity.
Familial platelet disorder (FPD) is a rare autosomal dominant disease characterized by thrombocytopenia and abnormal platelet function. Causal mutations have been identified in the gene encoding runt-related transcription factor 1 (RUNX1) of FPD patients.
To elucidate the role of RUNX1 in the regulation of expression of platelet factor 4 (PF4) and to propose a plausible mechanism underlying RUNX1-mediated induction of the FPD phenotype.
We assessed whether RUNX1 and its mutants, in combination with E26 transformation-specific-1 (ETS-1), Core-binding factor subunit beta (CBFβ), and Friend leukemia virus integration 1 (FLI-1), cooperatively regulate PF4 expression during megakaryocytic differentiation. In an embryonic stem cell differentiation system, expression levels of endogenous and exogenous RUNX1 and PF4 were determined by real-time RT-PCR. Promoter activation by the transcription factors were evaluated by reporter gene assays with HepG2 cells. DNA binding activity and protein interaction were analyzed by electrophoretic mobility shift assay and immunoprecipitation assay with Cos-7 cells, respectively. Protein localization was analyzed by immunocytochemistry and Western blotting with Cos-7 cells.
We demonstrated that RUNX1 activates endogenous PF4 expression in megakaryocytic differentiation. RUNX1, but not its mutants, in combination with ETS-1 and CBFβ, or FLI-1, synergistically activated the PF4 promoter. Each RUNX1 mutant harbors various functional abnormalities, including loss of DNA-binding activity, abnormal subcellular localization, and/or alterations of binding affinities for ETS-1, CBFβ, and FLI-1.
RUNX1, but not its mutants, strongly and synergistically activates PF4 expression along with ETS family proteins. Furthermore, loss of the RUNX1 transcriptional activation function is induced by various functional abnormalities.
Core Binding Factor acute myeloid leukemia (CBF-AML) with t(8;21) RUNX1-MTG8 or inv(16) CBFB-MYH11 fusion proteins often show upregulation of wild type or mutated KIT receptor. However, also non-CBF-AML frequently displays upregulated KIT expression. In the first part of this study we show that KIT expression can be also upregulated by miR-17, a regulator of RUNX1, the gene encoding a CBF subunit. Interestingly, both CBF leukemia fusion proteins and miR-17, which targets RUNX1-3'UTR, negatively affect a common core RUNX1-miRNA mechanism that forces myeloid cells into an undifferentiated, KIT-induced, proliferating state. In the second part of this study we took advantage of the conservation of the core RUNX1-miRNA mechanism in mouse and human, to mechanistically demonstrate in a mouse myeloid cell model that increased KIT-induced proliferation is per se a mechanism sufficient to delay myeloid differentiation.
Human (U937) or mouse (32D) myeloid clonal lines were used, respectively, to test: 1) the effect of RUNX1-MTG8 and CBFB-MYH11 fusion proteins, or upregulation of miR-17, on KIT-induced proliferation and myeloid differentiation, and 2) the effect of upregulation of KIT-induced proliferation per se on myeloid cell differentiation.
In the first part of this study we found that stable miR-17 upregulation affects, like the CBF-AML fusion proteins (RUNX1-MTG8 or CBFB-MYH11), a core RUNX1-miRNA mechanism leading to KIT-induced proliferation of differentiation-arrested U937 myeloid cells. In the second part of the study we harnessed the conservation of this core mechanism in human and mouse to demonstrate that the extent of KIT upregulation in 32D mouse myeloid cells with wild type RUNX1 can per se delay G-CSF-induced differentiation. The integrated information gathered from the two myeloid cell models shows that RUNX1 regulates myeloid differentiation not only by direct transcriptional regulation of coding and non-coding myeloid differentiation functions (e.g. miR-223), but also by modulating KIT-induced proliferation via non-coding miRNAs (e.g. miR-221).
The novelty of this study is dual. On the one hand, miRNAs (e.g. miR-17) can mimic the effects of CBF-AML fusion proteins by affecting a core RUNX1-miRNA mechanism of KIT-induced proliferation of undifferentiated myeloid cells. On the other hand, the extent of KIT-induced proliferation itself can modulate myeloid differentiation of cells with wild type RUNX1 function.
CBFβ and RUNX1 form a DNA-binding heterodimer and are both required for hematopoietic stem cell (HSC) generation in mice. However, the exact role of CBFβ in the production of HSCs remains unclear. Here, we generated and characterized 2 zebrafish cbfb null mutants. The cbfb(-/-) embryos underwent primitive hematopoiesis and developed transient erythromyeloid progenitors, but they lacked definitive hematopoiesis. Unlike runx1 mutants, in which HSCs are not formed, nascent, runx1(+)/c-myb(+) HSCs were formed in cbfb(-/-) embryos. However, the nascent HSCs were not released from the aorta-gonad-mesonephros (AGM) region, as evidenced by the accumulation of runx1(+) cells in the AGM that could not enter circulation. Moreover, wild-type embryos treated with an inhibitor of RUNX1-CBFβ interaction, Ro5-3335, phenocopied the hematopoietic defects in cbfb(-/-) mutants, rather than those in runx1(-/-) mutants. Finally, we found that cbfb was downstream of the Notch pathway during HSC development. Our data suggest that runx1 and cbfb are required at 2 different steps during early HSC development. CBFβ is not required for nascent HSC emergence but is required for the release of HSCs from AGM into circulation. Our results also indicate that RUNX1 can drive the emergence of nascent HSCs in the AGM without its heterodimeric partner CBFβ.
The rare but recurrent RUNX1-USP42 fusion gene is the result of a t(7;21)(p22;q22) chromosomal translocation and has been described in 6 cases of acute myeloid leukemia (AML) and one case of refractory anemia with excess of blast. In the present study, we present the molecular genetic analysis and the clinical features of a t(7;21)(p22;q22)-positive AML case. PCR amplified two RUNX1-USP42 cDNA fragments but no reciprocal USP42-RUNX1 fragment indicating that the RUNX1-USP42 is the leukemogenic fusion gene. Sequencing of the two amplified fragments showed that exon 6 or exon 7 of RUNX1 (accession number NM_001754 version 3) was fused to exon 3 of USP42 (accession number NM_032172 version 2). The predicted RUNX1-USP42 fusion protein would contain the Runt homology domain (RHD), which is responsible for heterodimerization with CBFB and for DNA binding, and the catalytic UCH (ubiquitin carboxyl terminal hydroxylase) domain of the USP42 protein. The bone marrow cells in the present case also had a 5q deletion, and it was revealed that 5 out of the 8 reported cases (including the present case) with t(7;21)(p22;q22)/RUNX1-USP42 also had cytogenetic abnormalities of 5q. The fact that t(7;21) and 5q- occur together much more often than chance would allow seems to be unquestionable, although the pathogenetic connection between the two aberrations remains unknown.
Most patients with acute myeloid leukemia (AML) and genetic rearrangements involving the core binding factor (CBF) have favorable prognosis. In contrast, a minority of them still have a high risk of leukemia recurrence. This study investigated the adverse features of CBF AML that could justify investigational therapeutic approaches.
One hundred and fifty patients (median age 42 yr, range 16-69) with CBF AML (RUNX1-RUNX1T1 n = 74; CBFB-MYH11 n = 76) were prospectively enrolled into two consecutive CETLAM protocols at 19 Spanish institutions. Main clinic and biologic parameters were analyzed in the whole series. In non-selected cases with available DNA samples, the impact of molecular characterization and minimal residual disease (MRD) was also studied.
Overall, complete remission (CR) rate was 89% (94% in ≤50 yr old and 72% in >50 yr, P = 0.002). At 5 yr, cumulative incidence of relapse (CIR) was 26 ± 1%, disease-free survival (DFS) 62 ± 6%, and overall survival (OS) 66 ± 4%. In multivariate analyses, leukocyte count above 20 × 10(9) /L, BAALC over-expression, and high copy numbers of RUNX1-RUNXT1 or CBFB-MYH11 after induction chemotherapy (CT) led to increased relapse rate. Regarding OS, age >50 yr, leukocyte count above 20 × 10(9) /L, and increased MN1 expression were adverse features.
Age, leukocyte counts, BAALC, and MN1 gene expressions as well as high copy numbers of RUNX1-RUNXT1 or CBFB-MYH11 after induction chemotherapy are useful tools to predict the outcome and should be considered for risk-adapted therapy.
Core binding factor (CBF)-positive acute myeloid leukemia (AML) presents a favorable prognosis, except for patients with KIT mutation, especially D816 mutation. The current retrospective study attempted to validate a prognostic role of KIT mutation in 121 Korean patients with CBF AML. The study patients consisted of 121 patients with CBF AML (82 patients with RUNX1/RUNX1T1 [67.8 %] and 39 patients with CBFB/MYH11 [32.2 %]) recruited from eight institutions in Korea. All patients received idarubicin plus cytarabine or behenoyl cytosine arabinoside 3 + 7 induction chemotherapy. The KIT gene mutation status was determined by direct sequencing analyses. A KIT mutation was detected in 32 cases (26.4 %) in our series of patients. The KIT mutation was most frequent in exon 17 (n = 18, 14.9 %; n = 16 with D816 mutation), followed by exon 8 (n = 10, 8.3 %). The presence of KIT D816 mutation was associated with adverse outcomes for the event-free survival (p = 0.03) and for the overall survival (p = 0.02). The unfavorable impact of D816 mutation was more prominent when the analysis was confined to the RUNX1/RUNX1T1 subtype. The KIT mutation was detected in 26.4 % of Korean patients with CBF AML. The KIT D816 mutation demonstrated an unfavorable prognostic implication, particularly in the RUNX1/RUNX1T1 subtype.
Core binding factor (CBF) leukemias, those with translocations or inversions that affect transcription factor genes RUNX1 or CBFB, account for ~24% of adult acute myeloid leukemia (AML) and 25% of pediatric acute lymphocytic leukemia (ALL). Current treatments for CBF leukemias are associated with significant morbidity and mortality, with a 5-y survival rate of ~50%. We hypothesize that the interaction between RUNX1 and CBFβ is critical for CBF leukemia and can be targeted for drug development. We developed high-throughput AlphaScreen and time-resolved fluorescence resonance energy transfer (TR-FRET) methods to quantify the RUNX1-CBFβ interaction and screen a library collection of 243,398 compounds. Ro5-3335, a benzodiazepine identified from the screen, was able to interact with RUNX1 and CBFβ directly, repress RUNX1/CBFB-dependent transactivation in reporter assays, and repress runx1-dependent hematopoiesis in zebrafish embryos. Ro5-3335 preferentially killed human CBF leukemia cell lines, rescued preleukemic phenotype in a RUNX1-ETO transgenic zebrafish, and reduced leukemia burden in a mouse CBFB-MYH11 leukemia model. Our data thus confirmed that RUNX1-CBFβ interaction can be targeted for leukemia treatment and we have identified a promising lead compound for this purpose.
The clinical value of serial minimal residual disease (MRD) monitoring in core binding factor (CBF) acute myeloid leukemia (AML) by quantitative RT-PCR was prospectively assessed in 278 patients [163 with t(8;21) and 115 with inv(16)] entered in the United Kingdom MRC AML 15 trial. CBF transcripts were normalized to 10(5) ABL copies. At remission, after course 1 induction chemotherapy, a > 3 log reduction in RUNX1-RUNX1T1 transcripts in BM in t(8;21) patients and a > 10 CBFB-MYH11 copy number in peripheral blood (PB) in inv(16) patients were the most useful prognostic variables for relapse risk on multivariate analysis. MRD levels after consolidation (course 3) were also informative. During follow-up, cut-off MRD thresholds in BM and PB associated with a 100% relapse rate were identified: for t(8;21) patients BM > 500 copies, PB > 100 copies; for inv(16) patients, BM > 50 copies and PB > 10 copies. Rising MRD levels on serial monitoring accurately predicted hematologic relapse. During follow-up, PB sampling was equally informative as BM for MRD detection. We conclude that MRD monitoring by quantitative RT-PCR at specific time points in CBF AML allows identification of patients at high risk of relapse and could now be incorporated in clinical trials to evaluate the role of risk directed/preemptive therapy.
Breast carcinoma is the leading cause of cancer-related mortality in women worldwide, with an estimated 1.38 million new cases and 458,000 deaths in 2008 alone. This malignancy represents a heterogeneous group of tumours with characteristic molecular features, prognosis and responses to available therapy. Recurrent somatic alterations in breast cancer have been described, including mutations and copy number alterations, notably ERBB2 amplifications, the first successful therapy target defined by a genomic aberration. Previous DNA sequencing studies of breast cancer genomes have revealed additional candidate mutations and gene rearrangements. Here we report the whole-exome sequences of DNA from 103 human breast cancers of diverse subtypes from patients in Mexico and Vietnam compared to matched-normal DNA, together with whole-genome sequences of 22 breast cancer/normal pairs. Beyond confirming recurrent somatic mutations in PIK3CA, TP53, AKT1, GATA3 and MAP3K1, we discovered recurrent mutations in the CBFB transcription factor gene and deletions of its partner RUNX1. Furthermore, we have identified a recurrent MAGI3-AKT3 fusion enriched in triple-negative breast cancer lacking oestrogen and progesterone receptors and ERBB2 expression. The MAGI3-AKT3 fusion leads to constitutive activation of AKT kinase, which is abolished by treatment with an ATP-competitive AKT small-molecule inhibitor.
Osteoarthritis (OA) is a degenerative joint disease that involves the destruction of articular cartilage and eventually leads to disability. Molecules that promote the selective differentiation of multipotent mesenchymal stem cells (MSCs) into chondrocytes may stimulate the repair of damaged cartilage. Using an image-based high-throughput screen, we identified the small molecule kartogenin, which promotes chondrocyte differentiation (median effective concentration = 100 nM), shows chondroprotective effects in vitro, and is efficacious in two OA animal models. Kartogenin binds filamin A, disrupts its interaction with the transcription factor core-binding factor β subunit (CBFβ), and induces chondrogenesis by regulating the CBFβ-RUNX1 transcriptional program. This work provides new insights into the control of chondrogenesis that may ultimately lead to a stem cell-based therapy for osteoarthritis.
Polycomb repressive complexes (PRCs) play key roles in developmental epigenetic regulation. Yet the mechanisms that target PRCs to specific loci in mammalian cells remain incompletely understood. In this study we show that Bmi1, a core component of Polycomb Repressive Complex 1 (PRC1), binds directly to the Runx1/CBFβ transcription factor complex. Genome-wide studies in megakaryocytic cells demonstrate significant chromatin occupancy overlap between the PRC1 core component Ring1b and Runx1/CBFβ and functional regulation of a considerable fraction of commonly bound genes. Bmi1/Ring1b and Runx1/CBFβ deficiencies generate partial phenocopies of one another in vivo. We also show that Ring1b occupies key Runx1 binding sites in primary murine thymocytes and that this occurs via PRC2-independent mechanisms. Genetic depletion of Runx1 results in reduced Ring1b binding at these sites in vivo. These findings provide evidence for site-specific PRC1 chromatin recruitment by core binding transcription factors in mammalian cells.
Translocations and mutations in the core binding factor genes, RUNX1 or CBFB, are found in acute myeloid and lymphocytic leukemia, therapy-related myeloid leukemia, myelodysplastic syndrome, chronic myelomonocytic leukemia, and in familial platelet disorder with predisposition to acute myeloid leukemia. Here we review the biochemical and biological properties of the normal Runx1 protein, discuss the nature of RUNX1 mutations in myeloid leukemia, their prognostic significance, and the mutations that cooperate or co-exist with them in these various diseases.
The KIT D816V mutation is detected in the vast majority of adult cases of systemic mastocytosis (SM). The mutation is also frequently detected in core-binding factor acute myeloid leukemia (CBF AML) defined by the presence of t(8;21)(q22;q22); RUNX1-RUNX1T1 or inv(16)(p13.1;q22)/t(16;16)(p13.1;q22); CBFB-MYH11 chromosomal rearrangements, but whether the mutation is indicative of associated SM is unclear. In the present study, patients with CBF AML were therefore analyzed for the KIT D816V mutation and mutation positive cases subsequently analyzed for the presence of SM. The KIT D816V mutation was detected in eight of 20 cases of CBF AML, with the frequency in t(8;21)(q22;q22) and inv(16)(p13.1;q22) positive cases being 31% and 57%, respectively. The fraction of KIT D816V mutation positive cells was highly variable among the eight mutation positive patients, with levels ranging from 0.04 to 98% in a pretreatment blood sample. Five of the eight cases carried the mutation in a cell fraction below one-tenth of the blast cell fraction, thus suggesting that KIT mutation is often a late event in leukemogenesis. None of the eight KIT D816V mutation positive cases fulfilled the World Health Organization diagnostic criteria of SM. The presence of the KIT D816V mutation in the CBF AML subgroup can therefore not be considered indicative of associated SM.
Hematopoietic stem cells (HSCs) and an earlier wave of definitive erythroid/myeloid progenitors (EMPs) differentiate from hemogenic endothelial cells in the conceptus. EMPs can be generated in vitro from embryonic or induced pluripotent stem cells, but efforts to produce HSCs have largely failed. The formation of both EMPs and HSCs requires the transcription factor Runx1 and its non-DNA binding partner core binding factor β (CBFβ). Here we show that the requirements for CBFβ in EMP and HSC formation in the conceptus are temporally and spatially distinct. Panendothelial expression of CBFβ in Tek-expressing cells was sufficient for EMP formation, but was not adequate for HSC formation. Expression of CBFβ in Ly6a-expressing cells, on the other hand, was sufficient for HSC, but not EMP, formation. The data indicate that EMPs and HSCs differentiate from distinct populations of hemogenic endothelial cells, with Ly6a expression specifically marking the HSC-generating hemogenic endothelium.
The mixed-lineage leukemia (MLL) H3K4 methyltransferase protein, and the heterodimeric RUNX1/CBFβ transcription factor complex, are critical for definitive and adult hematopoiesis, and both are frequently targeted in human acute leukemia. We identified a physical and functional interaction between RUNX1 (AML1) and MLL and show that both are required to maintain the histone lysine 4 trimethyl mark (H3K4me3) at 2 critical regulatory regions of the AML1 target gene PU.1. Similar to CBFβ, we show that MLL binds to AML1 abrogating its proteasome-dependent degradation. Furthermore, a subset of previously uncharacterized frame-shift and missense mutations at the N terminus of AML1, found in MDS and AML patients, impairs its interaction with MLL, resulting in loss of the H3K4me3 mark within PU.1 regulatory regions, and decreased PU.1 expression. The interaction between MLL and AML1 provides a mechanism for the sequence-specific binding of MLL to DNA, and identifies RUNX1 target genes as potential effectors of MLL function.
The link of chromatin remodeling to both neurodevelopment and cancer has recently been highlighted by the identification of mutations affecting BAF chromatin-remodeling components, such as ARID1B, in individuals with intellectual disability and cancer. However, the underlying molecular mechanism(s) remains unknown. Here, we show that ARID1B is a repressor of Wnt/β-catenin signaling. Through whole-transcriptome analysis, we find that in individuals with intellectual disability and ARID1B loss-of-function mutations, Wnt/β-catenin target genes are upregulated. Using cellular models of low and high Wnt/β-catenin activity, we demonstrate that knockdown of ARID1B activates Wnt/β-catenin target genes and Wnt/β-catenin-dependent transcriptional reporters in a β-catenin-dependent manner. Reciprocally, forced expression of ARID1B inhibits Wnt/β-catenin signaling downstream of the β-catenin destruction complex. Both endogenous and exogenous ARID1B associate with β-catenin and repress Wnt/β-catenin-mediated transcription through the BAF core subunit BRG1. Accordingly, mutations in ARID1B leading to partial or complete deletion of its BRG1-binding domain, as is often observed in intellectual disability and cancers, compromise association with β-catenin, and the resultant ARID1B mutant proteins fail to suppress Wnt/β-catenin signaling. Finally, knockdown of ARID1B in mouse neuroblastoma cells leads to neurite outgrowth through β-catenin. The data suggest that aberrations in chromatin-remodeling factors, such as ARID1B, might contribute to neurodevelopmental abnormalities and cancer through deregulation of developmental and oncogenic pathways, such as the Wnt/β-catenin signaling pathway.
Insulin produced by islet β-cells plays a critical role in glucose homeostasis, with both type I and type II diabetes resulting from inactivation and/or loss of this cell population. Islet-enriched transcription factors regulate β-cell formation and function, yet little is known about the molecules recruited to mediate control. An unbiased in-cell biochemical and mass spectrometry strategy was utilized to isolate MafA transcription factor binding proteins. Among the many coregulators identified were all of the subunits of the Mixed-Lineage Leukemia 3 (Mll3) and 4 (Mll4) complexes, histone 3 lysine 4 (H3K4) methyltransferases strongly associated with gene activation. MafA was bound to the ∼1.5 MDa Mll3 and Mll4 complexes in size fractionated β-cell extracts. Likewise, closely related human MAFB, which is important to β-cell formation and co-produced with MAFA in adult human islet β-cells, bound MLL3 and MLL4 complexes. Knockdown of NCOA6, a core subunit of these methyltransferases, reduced expression of a subset of MAFA and MAFB target genes in mouse and human β-cell lines. In contrast, a broader impact on MafA/MafB gene activation was observed in mice lacking NCoA6 in islet β-cells. We propose that MLL3 and MLL4 are broadly required for controlling MAFA and MAFB transactivation during development and postnatally.
Acute myeloid leukemia patients with recurrent cytogenetic abnormalities including inv(16);CBFB-MYH11 and t(15;17);PML-RARA may be assessed by monitoring the levels of the corresponding abnormal fusion transcripts by quantitative reverse transcription-PCR (qRT-PCR). Such testing is important for evaluating the response to therapy and for the detection of early relapse. Existing qRT-PCR methods are well established and in widespread use in clinical laboratories but they are laborious and require the generation of standard curves. Here, we describe a new method to quantitate fusion transcripts in acute myeloid leukemia by qRT-PCR without the need for standard curves. Our approach uses a plasmid calibrator containing both a fusion transcript sequence and a reference gene sequence, representing a perfect normalized copy number (fusion transcript copy number/reference gene transcript copy number; NCN) of 1.0. The NCN of patient specimens can be calculated relative to that of the single plasmid calibrator using experimentally derived PCR efficiency values. We compared the data obtained using the plasmid calibrator method to commercially available assays using standard curves and found that the results obtained by both methods are comparable over a broad range of values with similar sensitivities. Our method has the advantage of simplicity and is therefore lower in cost and may be less subject to errors that may be introduced during the generation of standard curves.
TFIIA is an important positive regulator of TFIID, the primary promoter recognition factor of the basal RNA polymerase II transcription machinery. TFIIA antagonises negative TFIID regulators such as negative cofactor 2 (NC2), promotes specific binding of the TBP subunit of TFIID to TATA core promoter sequence elements and stimulates the interaction of TBP-associated factors (TAFs) in the TFIID complex with core promoter elements located downstream of TATA, such as the initiator element (INR). Metazoan TFIIA consists of 3 subunits, TFIIAα (35 kDa), β (19 kDa) and γ (12 kDa). TFIIAα and β subunits are encoded by a single gene and result from site-specific cleavage of a 55 kDa TFIIA(α/β) precursor protein by the protease Taspase1. Metazoan cells have been shown to contain variable amounts of TFIIA (55/12 kDa) and Taspase1-processed TFIIA (35/19/12 kDa) depending on cell type, suggesting distinct gene-specific roles of unprocessed and Taspase1-processed TFIIA. How precisely Taspase1 processing affects TFIIA functions is not understood. Here we report that Taspase1 processing alters TFIIA interactions with TFIID and the conformation of TFIID/TFIIA promoter complexes. We further show that Taspase1 processing induces increased sensitivity of TFIID/TFIIA complexes to the repressor NC2, which is counteracted by the presence of an INR core promoter element. Our results provide first evidence that Taspase1 processing affects TFIIA regulation of TFIID and suggest that Taspase1 processing of TFIIA is required to establish INR-selective core promoter activity in the presence of NC2.
To detect the expression of growth factors relating to bone reconstructions in microscrew-bone interface of implanted titanium microscrews near the extraction wounds, and to determine the influence of healing process on the growth factors.
Eight male Beagle dogs (age 18 months) were divided into experimental and control groups. Titanium microscrews were implanted near an extraction wound in the dogs in the experimental group, while the controls had implantation without extraction wounds. The dogs were sacrificed at 1, 3, 8, 12 weeks, respectively. Immunohistochemistry and in situ hybridization sections were performed to detect the expression of TGF-beta, TNF-alpha, osteocalcin (OC) protein and Cbfal mRNA.
The experimental group had higher levels of expression of TGF-beta, TNF-alpha protein and Cbfa1 mRNA than the controls, with significant differences appearing at week one for TNF-alpha (P<0.05), week three for TGF-beta and TNF-alpha (P<0.05), and week eight for Cbfa1 mRNA (P<0.05). The expression of OC increased over time and reached peak at week eight (P<0.05).
Microscrews implanted near extraction wounds can maintain stability. Severe inflammation occurs in the early stage of healing, but does not sustain. Bone remodeling remains active over the healing process. But prolonged healing phase without force loading could weaken the remodeling.
The progression of multiple myeloma (MM) is governed by a network of molecular signals, the majority of which remain to be identified. Recent studies suggest that Runt-related transcription factor 2 (Runx2), a well-known bone-specific transcription factor, is also expressed in solid tumors, where expression promotes both bone metastasis and osteolysis. However, the function of Runx2 in MM remains unknown. The current study demonstrated that (1) Runx2 expression in primary human MM cells is significantly greater than in plasma cells from healthy donors and patients with monoclonal gammopathy of undetermined significance; (2) high levels of Runx2 expression in MM cells are associated with a high-risk population of MM patients; and (3) overexpression of Runx2 in MM cells enhanced tumor growth and disease progression in vivo. Additional studies demonstrated that MM cell-derived Runx2 promotes tumor progression through a mechanism involving the upregulation of Akt/β-catenin/Survivin signaling and enhanced expression of multiple metastatic genes/proteins, as well as the induction of a bone-resident cell-like phenotype in MM cells. Thus, Runx2 expression supports the aggressive phenotype of MM and is correlated with poor prognosis. These data implicate Runx2 expression as a major regulator of MM progression in bone and myeloma bone disease.
We have shown constitutive expression of the master regulator of osteoblastogenesis, runt-related transcription factor-2 (Runx2), by microglia cells outside bone. Here, we attempted to evaluate the pathological significance of Runx2 in microglial BV-2 cells exposed to ATP at a high concentration. Marked upregulation of Runx2 transcript and protein expression was seen in cells exposed to 1 mM ATP for a period longer than 30 min without inducing cytotoxicity. The Runx2 upregulation by ATP was prevented by extracellular and intracellular Ca(2+) chelators, while thapsigargin upregulated Runx2 expression alone without affecting the upregulation by ATP. A calmodulin antagonist prevented the upregulation by ATP, with calcineurin inhibitors being ineffective. Although ATP markedly increased nuclear levels of nuclear factor of activated T cell-2 (NFAT2), Runx2 promoter activity was not simulated by the introduction of either NFAT1 or NFAT2, but facilitated by that of CCAAT enhancer binding protein-α (C/EBPα), C/EBPβ and nuclear factor (erythroid-derived 2)-like-2 (Nrf2). Exposure to ATP up-regulated C/EBPβ and Nrf2, but not C/EBPα, expression, in addition to increasing nuclear levels of respective corresponding proteins. Runx2 upregulation by ATP was deteriorated by knockdown of C/EBPβ but not by that of Nrf2, however, while exposure to ATP up-regulated matrix metalloproteinase-13 (Mmp13) expression in a Runx2-dependent manner. Overexpression of Runx2 up-regulated Mmp13 expression with promoted incorporation of fluorescent beads into BV-2 cells without ATP. These results suggest that extracellular ATP up-regulates Runx2 expression through activation of the C/EBPβ signaling in a calmodulin-dependent manner to play a pivotal role in phagocytosis in microglial BV-2 cells.
A 40-year-old woman developed therapy-related acute myeloid leukemia (t-AML) with inv(16)(p13.1q22) and a rare type D form of core-binding factor β-subunit gene-myosin heavy chain 11 gene (CBFB-MYH11) fusion transcript approximately 2.5 years after receiving chemoradiotherapy for uterine cervical cancer. t-AML with inv(16)(p13.1q22) and rare non-type A CBFB-MYH11 typically develops after exposure to a topoisomerase II inhibitor, with a short period of latency of one to five years. As the patient had no history of exposure to topoisomerase II inhibitors, among her previously used chemotherapeutics, the topoisomerase I inhibitor, irinotecan, was speculated to be the most plausible cause of t-AML in this case. The present case suggests that irinotecan may cause t-AML resembling that associated with topoisomerase II inhibitors.
Matrix metalloproteinase 13 (Mmp13, collagenase-3) plays an essential role in bone metabolism and mineral homeostasis. It is regulated by numerous factors, including BMP-2, parathyroid hormone, and 1α,25-dihydroxyvitamin D3 (1,25(OH)2D3), through transcription factors such as Runt-related transcription factor 2 (RUNX2), CCAAT/enhancer-binding protein β (C/EBPβ), OSX, and vitamin D receptor (VDR). During osteoblast maturation, the basal expression of Mmp13 and its sensitivity to 1,25(OH)2D3 are strikingly increased. In this report, ChIP-sequencing analysis in mouse preosteoblasts revealed that the Mmp13 gene was probably regulated by three major enhancers located -10, -20, and -30 kb upstream of the gene promoter, occupied by activated VDR and prebound C/EBPβ and RUNX2, respectively. Initially, bacterial artificial chromosome clone recombineering and traditional mutagenesis defined binding sites for VDR and RUNX2. We then employed a CRISPR/Cas9 gene editing approach to delete the -10 and -30 kb Mmp13 enhancers, a region proximal to the promoter, and VDR or RUNX2. VDR-mediated up-regulation of Mmp13 transcription was completely abrogated upon removal of the -10 kb enhancer, resulting in a 1,25(OH)2D3-directed repression of Mmp13. Deletion of either the -30 kb enhancer or RUNX2 resulted in a complete loss of basal transcript activity and a ChIP-identified destabilization of the chromatin enhancer environment and factor binding. Whereas enhancer deletions only affected Mmp13 expression, the RUNX2 deletion led to changes in gene expression, a reduction in cellular proliferation, and an inability to differentiate. We conclude that the Mmp13 gene is regulated via at least three specific distal enhancers that display independent activities yet are able to integrate response from multiple signaling pathways in a model of activation and suppression.
Cartilage generation and degradation are regulated by miRNAs. Our previous study has shown altered expression of miR-193b in chondrogenic human adipose-derived mesenchymal stem cells (hADSCs). In the current study, we investigated the role of miR-193b in chondrogenesis and cartilage degradation. Luciferase reporter assays showed that miR-193b targeted seed sequences of the TGFB2 and TGFBR3 3'-UTRs. MiR-193b suppressed the expression of early chondrogenic markers in chondrogenic ATDC5 cells, and TNF-alpha expression in IL-1b-induced PMCs. In conclusion, MiR-193b may inhibit early chondrogenesis by targeting TGFB2 and TGFBR3, and may regulate inflammation by repressing TNF-alpha expression in inflamed chondrocytes.
The present study is to describe the clinical impact of S100 and S100β for the evaluation of cerebral damage in cardiac surgery with or without the use of cardiopulmonary bypass (CPB).
Quantitative results of S100 and S100β reported in the literature of the year range 1990-2014 were collected, screened and analyzed.
Cerebrospinal fluid and serum S100 levels showed a same trend reaching a peak at the end of CPB. The cerebrospinal fluid/serum S100 ratio decreased during CPB, reached a nadir at 6 h after CPB and then increased and kept high untill 24 h after CPB. Serum S100 at the end of CPB was much higher in infant than in adults, and in on-pump than in off-pump coronary artery bypass patients. ∆S100 increased with age and CPB time but lack of statistical significances. Patients receiving an aorta replacement had a much higher ∆S100 than those receiving a congenital heart defect repair. Serum S100β reached a peak at the end of CPB, whereas cerebrospinal fluid S100 continued to increase and reached a peak at 6 h after CPB. The cerebrospinal fluid/serum S100β ratio decreased during CPB, increased at the end of CPB, peaked 1 h after CPB, and then decreased abruptly. The increase of serum S100β at the end of CPB was associated with type of operation, younger age, lower core temperature and cerebral damages. ∆S100β displayed a decreasing trend with age, type of operation, shortening of CPB duration, increasing core temperature, lessening severity of cerebral damage and the application of intervenes. Linear correlation analysis revealed that serum S100β concentration at the end of CPB correlated closely with CPB duration.
S100 and S100β in cerebrospinal fluid can be more accurate than in the serum for the evaluations of cerebral damage in cardiac surgery. However, cerebrospinal fluid biopsies are limited. But serum S100β and ∆S100β seem to be more sensitive than serum S100 and ∆S100. The cerebral damage in cardiac surgery might be associated with younger age, lower core temperature and longer CPB duration during the operation. Effective intervenes with modified CPB circuit filters or oxygenators and supplemented anesthetic agents or priming components may alleviate the cerebral damage.
The Ssl1/p44 subunit is a core component of the yeast/mammalian general transcription factor TFIIH, which is involved in transcription and DNA repair. Ssl1/p44 binds to and stimulates the Rad3/XPD helicase activity of TFIIH. To understand the helicase stimulatory mechanism of Ssl1/p44, we determined the crystal structure of the N-terminal regulatory domain of Ssl1 from Saccharomyces cerevisiae. Ssl1 forms a von Willebrand factor A fold in which a central six-stranded β-sheet is sandwiched between three α helices on both sides. Structural and biochemical analyses of Ssl1/p44 revealed that the β4-α5 loop, which is frequently found at the interface between von Willebrand factor A family proteins and cellular counterparts, is critical for the stimulation of Rad3/XPD. Yeast genetics analyses showed that double mutation of Leu-239 and Ser-240 in the β4-α5 loop of Ssl1 leads to lethality of a yeast strain, demonstrating the importance of the Rad3-Ssl1 interactions to cell viability. Here, we provide a structural model for the Rad3/XPD-Ssl1/p44 complex and insights into how the binding of Ssl1/p44 contributes to the helicase activity of Rad3/XPD and cell viability.
Circadian rhythm dysfunction is linked to many diseases, yet pathophysiological roles in articular cartilage homeostasis and degenerative joint disease including osteoarthritis (OA) remains to be investigated in vivo. Here, we tested whether environmental or genetic disruption of circadian homeostasis predisposes to OA-like pathological changes. Male mice were examined for circadian locomotor activity upon changes in the light:dark (LD) cycle or genetic disruption of circadian rhythms. Wild-type (WT) mice were maintained on a constant 12 h:12 h LD cycle (12:12 LD) or exposed to weekly 12 h phase shifts. Alternatively, male circadian mutant mice (Clock(Δ19) or Csnk1e(tau) mutants) were compared with age-matched WT littermates that were maintained on a constant 12:12 LD cycle. Disruption of circadian rhythms promoted osteoarthritic changes by suppressing proteoglycan accumulation, upregulating matrix-degrading enzymes and downregulating anabolic mediators in the mouse knee joint. Mechanistically, these effects involved activation of the PKCδ-ERK-RUNX2/NFκB and β-catenin signaling pathways, stimulation of MMP-13 and ADAMTS-5, as well as suppression of the anabolic mediators SOX9 and TIMP-3 in articular chondrocytes of phase-shifted mice. Genetic disruption of circadian homeostasis does not predispose to OA-like pathological changes in joints. Our results, for the first time, provide compelling in vivo evidence that environmental disruption of circadian rhythms is a risk factor for the development of OA-like pathological changes in the mouse knee joint.
HMG20A is a high mobility group (HMG) domain containing protein homologous to HMG20B, a core subunit of the Lys-specific demethylase 1/REST co-repressor 1 (LSD1-CoREST) histone demethylase complex. Here, we show that HMG20A can replace HMG20B and, therefore, they are mutually exclusive subunits of the complex. Both proteins interact through a coiled-coil domain with BHC80, another subunit of the LSD1-CoREST complex. To investigate the functional differences between the two proteins, we performed transcriptomic analysis of HMG20A- and HMG20B-depleted cells. Analysis of the misregulated genes in HMG20A-knockdown cells evidenced a high proportion of genes related to the epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition (EMT) process. EMT occurs during embryonic development or during the course of malignant cancer progression and consists in the dynamic and reversible transitions between epithelial and mesenchymal phenotypes. We show that HMG20A together with LSD1 are required for SNAI1-dependent repression of epithelial genes and for (transforming growth factor β) TGF-β-triggered EMT. Importantly, HMG20A-depleted cells displayed reduced binding of LSD1 to epithelial gene promoters and increased methylation of lysine 4 of histone H3, suggesting a role of HMG20A in recruiting or in stabilizing the complex at the chromatin. SNAI1 and the TGF-β-related transcription factor SMAD4 were found to be associated with the LSD1-CoREST complex containing HMG20A. Furthermore, we show that HMG20A-depleted cells displayed reduced motility and invasion activity. Finally, we show that expression of HMG20A correlates positively with mesenchymal markers and negatively with epithelial markers in human tumor samples. Taken together, our data demonstrate that HMG20A is essential for the mesenchymal phenotype.
Vascular calcification is a risk factor for causing cardiovascular events and has a high prevalence among chronic kidney disease (CKD) patients. However, the molecular mechanism underlying this pathogenic process is still obscure.
Vascular smooth muscle cells (VSMCs) were induced by a concentration of phosphorus (Pi) of 2.5 mM, and were subjected to cell calcification analyses. The effect of high Pi on the Wnt/β-catenin pathway was measured using a TOP/FOP-Flash reporter assay. The transcriptional regulation of β-catenin on PIT1 (a type III sodium-dependent phosphate cotransporter) was confirmed by promoter reporter and chromatin immunoprecipitation assays. The 5/6 nephrectomized rat was used as an in vivo model and was fed a high Pi diet to induce aortic calcification. Serum levels of phosphate, calcium, creatine, and blood urea nitrogen were measured, and abdominal aortic calcification was examined.
High Pi induced VSMC calcification, downregulated expression levels of VSMC markers, and upregulated levels of osteogenic markers. High Pi activated the Wnt/β-catenin pathway and β-catenin activity. β-Catenin was involved in the process of high Pi-induced VSMC calcification. Further investigation revealed that β-catenin transcriptionally regulated Pit1, a necessary player in VSMC osteogenic phenotype change and calcification. The in vivo study showed that β-catenin was involved in rat abdominal aortic calcification induced by high Pi. When knockdown expression of β-catenin in the rat model was investigated, we found that aortic calcification was reduced.
These results suggest that β-catenin is an important player in high phosphorus level-induced aortic calcification in CKD.
In hair follicle cells APCDD1 inhibits the canonical WNT/β-Catenin pathway and its inactivation is associated with an autosomal dominant form of hair loss. We analyzed the role of APCDD1 for the osteogenic differentiation in dental follicle cells (DFCs) and identified a new and surprising function. Contrarily to hair follicle cells APCDD1 was crucial for the expression of β-Catenin and for the activity of the TCF/LEF reporter assay in DFCs. In addition, a depletion of APCDD1 inhibits the expression of osteogenic markers such as RUNX2 and decreased the matrix mineralization. However, similar to hair follicle cells in previous studies a control cell culture with oral squamous carcinoma cells showed that APCDD1 inhibits the expression of β-Catenin and of typical target genes of the canonical WNT/β-Catenin pathway. In conclusion, our data disclosed an unusual role of APCDD1 in DFCs during the osteogenic differentiation. APCDD1 sustains the expression and activation of β-Catenin.
The Vif (viral infectivity factor) protein of human immunodeficiency virus type-1 (HIV-1) is critical for HIV-1 infectivity. CBF-β is required for HIV-1 Vif function, as it increases the steady-state level of the HIV-1 Vif protein to promote host restriction factor APOBEC3 degradation. However, the precise mechanism by which CBF-β promotes HIV-1 Vif levels remains unclear. In the present study, we provided evidences that CBF-β promoted steady-state levels of HIV-1 Vif by inhibiting the degradation of HIV-1 Vif through the proteasome pathway. Our results reveal a new mechanism by which a cellular protein supports viral infectivity by inhibiting viral protein degradation.
Osteoblastic differentiation is regulated by various factors, including hormones and transcription factors. Runt-related transcription factor 2 (Runx2) is an essential player in osteoblastogenesis and transactivates its molecular target by creating a protein complex with its hetero-dimeric partner core binding factor beta (Cbfb). However, the molecular regulation of Cbfb expression remains unknown. Here, we identified miR-145 as a crucial regulator of Cbfb expression. The expression of miR-145 decreased during osteoblastogenesis, in contrast to the upregulation of Cbfb expression, indicating that miR-145 works as an inhibitor of osteoblastogenesis. Stable expression of miR-145 decreased endogenous Cbfb expression and inhibited osteoblastogenesis, in cooperation with miR-34c. Furthermore, miR-145 decreased bone regeneration in vivo. Our results indicate that miR-145 physiologically regulates osteoblast differentiation and bone formation via Cbfb expression by forming a regulatory microRNA network.
The generation of diverse neuronal subtypes involves specification of neural progenitors and, subsequently, postmitotic neuronal differentiation, a relatively poorly understood process. Here, we describe a mechanism whereby the neurotrophic factor NGF and the transcription factor Runx1 coordinate postmitotic differentiation of nonpeptidergic nociceptors, a major nociceptor subtype. We show that the integrity of a Runx1/CBFβ holocomplex is crucial for NGF-dependent nonpeptidergic nociceptor maturation. NGF signals through the ERK/MAPK pathway to promote expression of Cbfb but not Runx1 prior to maturation of nonpeptidergic nociceptors. In contrast, transcriptional initiation of Runx1 in nonpeptidergic nociceptor precursors is dependent on the homeodomain transcription factor Islet1, which is largely dispensable for Cbfb expression. Thus, an NGF/TrkA-MAPK-CBFβ pathway converges with Islet1-Runx1 signaling to promote Runx1/CBFβ holocomplex formation and nonpeptidergic nociceptor maturation. Convergence of extrinsic and intrinsic signals to control heterodimeric transcription factor complex formation provides a robust mechanism for postmitotic neuronal subtype specification.
The t(8;21) and Inv(16) translocations disrupt the normal function of core binding factors alpha (CBFA) and beta (CBFB), respectively. These translocations represent two of the most common genomic abnormalities in acute myeloid leukemia (AML) patients, occurring in approximately 25% pediatric and 15% of adult with this malignancy. Both translocations are associated with favorable clinical outcomes after intensive chemotherapy, and given the perceived mechanistic similarities, patients with these translocations are frequently referred to as having CBF-AML. It remains uncertain as to whether, collectively, these translocations are mechanistically the same or impact different pathways in subtle ways that have both biological and clinical significance. Therefore, we used transcriptome sequencing (RNA-seq) to investigate the similarities and differences in genes and pathways between these subtypes of pediatric AMLs. Diagnostic RNA from patients with t(8;21) (N = 17), Inv(16) (N = 14), and normal karyotype (NK, N = 33) were subjected to RNA-seq. Analyses compared the transcriptomes across these three cytogenetic subtypes, using the NK cohort as the control. A total of 1291 genes in t(8;21) and 474 genes in Inv(16) were differentially expressed relative to the NK controls, with 198 genes differentially expressed in both subtypes. The majority of these genes (175/198; binomial test p-value < 10-30) are consistent in expression changes among the two subtypes suggesting the expression profiles are more similar between the CBF cohorts than in the NK cohort. Our analysis also revealed alternative splicing events (ASEs) differentially expressed across subtypes, with 337 t(8;21)-specific and 407 Inv(16)-specific ASEs detected, the majority of which were acetylated proteins (p = 1.5x10-51 and p = 1.8x10-54 for the two subsets). In addition to known fusions, we identified and verified 16 de novo fusions in 43 patients, including three fusions involving NUP98 in six patients. Clustering of differentially expressed genes indicated that the homeobox (HOX) gene family, including two transcription factors (MEIS1 and NKX2-3) were down-regulated in CBF compared to NK samples. This finding supports existing data that the dysregulation of HOX genes play a central role in biology CBF-AML hematopoiesis. These data provide comprehensive transcriptome profiling of CBF-AML and delineate genes and pathways that are differentially expressed, providing insights into the shared biology as well as differences in the two CBF subsets.
In this work, we evaluated the incidence and prognostic value of several genetic aberrations in patients with a dia-gnosis of acute myeloid leukemia (AML).
We analysed 90 patients: 42 males (mean age 54.5 years) and 48 females (mean age 59 years), with AML. The genetics of all leukemia samples was studied using conventional cytogenetics, the interphase fluorescence in situ hybridisation as well as the standardized RTPCR protocol.
In 34.4% of patients, we detected at least one of the analysed genetic aberrations, except the CBFB MYH11, which we did not detect. Translocation t(8;21)/ AML1 ETO was found in 4.4% of patients with a mean age of 45.4 years, while none of these patients was older than 55 years. Translocation t(15;17)/ PMLRARA was found in 5.5% of patients with a mean age of 52.6 years and an almost equal distribution between younger and older patients. The MLL gene rearrangements were found in 6.6% of patients, the - 5/ 5q-  and/ or - 7/ 7q-  aberrations in 7.7% of patients, while the most frequent genetic abnormality in our study was trisomy 8 (10%). Moreover, we found a favorable clinical outcome in patients expressing fusion genes AML1- ETO or PMLRARA in contrast to an adverse clinical outcome with few remissions and death in AML patients with MLL, - 5q/ - 5 and - 7q/ 7- . Finally, an intermediate prognosis was found in patients with trisomy 8.
In this study, we found a good congruence with published literature on the incidence and prognostic value of several well established AMLassociated genetic aberrations. This simple geneticbased classification system helps us to identify patients with a favorable, intermediate or unfavorable prognosis and to treat them with the best currently available therapy. However, analysis of new genetically defined abnormalities in AML is neces-sary for development of better therapeutic strategies and/ or dia-gnostics.Key words: acute myeloid leukemia -  genetic aberrations -  fusion genes -  cytogenetics -  incidence -  clinical outcome.
RUNX1 and CBFB are among the most frequently mutated genes in human leukemias. Genetic alterations such as chromosomal translocations, copy number variations and point mutations have been widely reported to result in the malfunction of RUNX transcription factors. Leukemias arising from such alterations in RUNX family genes are collectively termed core binding factor (CBF) leukemias. Although adult CBF leukemias generally are considered a favorable risk group as compared with other forms of acute myeloid leukemia, the 5-year survival rate remains low. An improved understanding of the molecular mechanism for CBF leukemia is imperative to uncover novel treatment options. Over the years, retroviral transduction-transplantation assays and transgenic, knockin and knockout mouse models alone or in combination with mutagenesis have been used to study the roles of RUNX alterations in leukemogenesis. Although successful in inducing leukemia, the existing assays and models possess many inherent limitations. A CBF leukemia model which induces leukemia with complete penetrance and short latency would be ideal as a platform for drug discovery. Here, we summarize the currently available mouse models which have been utilized to study CBF leukemias, discuss the advantages and limitations of individual experimental systems, and propose suggestions for improvements of mouse models.
Hematopoietic stem and progenitor cells (HSPCs) give rise to all of the cells that make up the hematopoietic system in the human body, making their stability and resilience especially important. Damage to these cells can severely impact cell development and has the potential to cause diseases, such as leukemia. Leukemia-causing chromosomal rearrangements have largely been studied in the context of radiation exposure and are formed by a multi-step process, including an initial DNA breakage and fusion of the free DNA ends. However, the mechanism for DNA breakage in patients without previous radiation exposure is unclear. Here, we investigate the role of non-cytotoxic levels of environmental factors, benzene, and diethylnitrosamine (DEN), and chemotherapeutic agents, etoposide, and doxorubicin, in generating DNA breakage at the patient breakpoint hotspots of the MLL and CBFB genes in human HSPCs. These conditions represent exposure to chemicals encountered daily or residual doses from chemotherapeutic drugs. Exposure of HSPCs to non-cytotoxic levels of environmental chemicals or chemotherapeutic agents causes DNA breakage at preferential sites in the human genome, including the leukemia-related genes MLL and CBFB. Though benzene, etoposide, and doxorubicin have previously been linked to leukemia formation, this is the first study to demonstrate a role for DEN in the generation of DNA breakage at leukemia-specific sites. These chemical-induced DNA breakpoints coincide with sites of predicted topoisomerase II cleavage. The distribution of breakpoints by exposure to non-cytotoxic levels of chemicals showed a similar pattern to fusion breakpoints in leukemia patients. Our findings demonstrate that HSPCs exposed to non-cytotoxic levels of environmental chemicals and chemotherapeutic agents are prone to topoisomerase II-mediated DNA damage at the leukemia-associated genes MLL and CBFB. These data suggest a role for long-term environmental chemical or residual chemotherapeutic drug exposure in generation of DNA breakage at sites with a propensity to form leukemia-causing gene rearrangements.
Core binding factor β (Cbfβ) is a partner protein of Runx family transcription factors with minimally characterized function in cartilage. Here we address the role of Cbfβ in cartilage by generating chondrocyte-specific Cbfβ-deficient mice (Cbfb(Δch/Δch) ) from Cbfb-floxed mice crossed with mice expressing Cre from the Col2a1 promoter. Cbfb(Δch/Δch) mice died soon after birth and exhibited delayed endochondral bone formation, shorter appendicular skeleton length with increased proliferative chondrocytes, and nearly absent hypertrophic chondrocyte zones. Immunohistochemical and quantitative real-time PCR analyses showed that the number and size of proliferative chondrocytes increased and the expression of chondrocyte maturation markers at the growth plates, including Runx2, osterix, and osteopontin, significantly diminished in Cbfb(Δch/Δch) mice compared to wild type mice. With regard to signaling pathways, both PTHrP-Ihh and BMP signaling were compromised in Cbfb(Δch/Δch) mice. Mechanistically, Cbfβ deficiency in chondrocytes caused a decrease of protein levels of Runx transcription factors by accelerating polyubiquitination-mediated proteosomal degradation in vitro. Indeed, Runx2 and Runx3, but not Runx1, decreased in Cbfb(Δch/Δch) mice. Collectively, these findings indicate that Cbfβ plays a critical role for chondrocyte differentiation through stabilizing Runx2 and Runx3 proteins in cartilage J. Cell. Physiol. 230: 162-171, 2016. © 2015 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.
Polymorphisms in miRNA genes could potentially alter various biological processes by influencing the processing and (or) target selection of miRNAs. The rs14120863 (C > G) mutation, which we characterized in a Gushi-Anka F2 resource population, resides in the precursor region of miR-1666. Association analysis with chicken carcass and growth traits showed that the SNP was significantly associated with carcass weight, evisceration weight, breast muscle weight, leg muscle weight, and body weight at 8 weeks of age, as well as some body size indexes including shank girth, chest breadth, breast bone length, and body slanting length, in the Gushi-Anka F2 resource population. Quantitative RT-PCR results showed that miR-1666 expression levels in muscle tissues differed within various genotypes. Experiment in DF1 cells further confirmed that the SNP in miR-1666 could significantly alter mature miRNA production. Subsequently, using dual-luciferase report assay, we verified that miR-1666 could perform its function through targeting of the CBFB gene. In conclusion, the SNP in the precursor of miR-1666 could significantly reduce mature miR-1666 production. It may further affect the function of miR-1666 through the target gene CBFB, hence it is associated with chicken growth traits.
Cytogenetics defines disease entities and predicts prognosis in acute myeloid leukemia (AML). Conventional karyotyping provides a comprehensive view of the genome, while fluorescence in situ hybridization (FISH) detects targeted abnormalities. The aim of this study was to compare the utility of karyotyping and FISH in adult AML.
We studied 250 adult AML cases with concurrent karyotyping and FISH testing. Karyotyping was considered adequate when 20 or more metaphases were analyzed.
In total, 220 cases had adequate karyotyping and were classified as normal karyotype/normal FISH (n = 92), normal karyotype/abnormal FISH (n = 4), abnormal karyotype/normal FISH (n = 8), and abnormal karyotype/abnormal FISH (n = 116). The overall karyotype/FISH concordance rate was 97.7% with five discordant cases identified, four from the normal karyotype/abnormal FISH group and one from the abnormal karyotype/abnormal FISH group. No karyotype/FISH discordance was seen in the abnormal karyotype/normal FISH group for the FISH probes evaluated. FISH lent prognostic information in one (0.5%) of 220 cases with normal karyotype/abnormal FISH: CBFB-MYH11 fusion, indicating favorable prognosis.
In adult AML, FISH rarely provides additional information when karyotyping is adequate. We therefore propose an evidence-based, cost-effective algorithmic approach for routine conventional karyotype and FISH testing in adult AML workup.
Eighty-six adult patients with inv(16) acute myeloid leukemia (AML) in first complete remission (CR1) were serially monitored for CBFB-MYH11 transcript levels during the early courses of chemotherapy. Fifty-seven and 29 of them received chemotherapy/autologous stem cell transplant (SCT) and allogeneic (allo-)SCT after second consolidation, respectively. For patients receiving chemotherapy/autologous SCT, the sole independent adverse prognostic factor for the cumulative incidence of relapse (CIR), disease-free survival (DFS) and overall survival (OS) was a CBFB-MYH11 level > 0.2% after course 2 consolidation (p = 0.003, 0.003 and 0.031), which was used to define a poor molecular response (MR). Allo-SCT significantly decreased the 3-year CIR and increased the DFS and OS of patients with a poor MR (p < 0.0001, 0.0001 and 0.045) but did not improve the outcome of patients with good MR (all p > 0.05) compared with chemotherapy/autologous SCT. Therefore, allo-SCT could improve the outcome of adult patients with inv(16) AML in CR1 with a poor MR during the early courses of chemotherapy.
Brain-enriched miR-128 is repressed in glioma cells, and could inhibit the proliferation of gliomas by targeting genes such as E2F3a and BMI1. To identify more targets of miR-128 in glioblastoma multiforme, the pulse stable isotope labeling with amino acids in cell culture (pSILAC) technique was used to test its impact on whole protein synthesis in T98G glioma cells. We successfully identified 1897 proteins, of which 1459 proteins were quantified. Among them, 133 proteins were downregulated after the overexpression of miR-128. Through predictions using various bioinformatics tools, 13 candidate target genes were chosen. A luciferase assay validated that 11 of 13 selected genes were potential targets of miR-128, and a mutagenesis experiment confirmed CBFB, CORO1C, GLTP, HnRNPF, and TROVE2 as the target genes. Moreover, we observed that the expression of CORO1C, TROVE2, and HnRNPF were higher in glioma cell lines compared to normal brain tissues and presented a tendency toward downregulation after overexpression of miR-128 in T98G cells. Furthermore, we have validated that CORO1C, TROVE2, and HnRNPF could inhibit glioma cell proliferation. In sum, our data showed that the integration of pSILAC and bioinformatics analysis was an efficient method for seeking the targets of miRNAs, and plentiful targets of miR-128 were screened and laid the foundation for research into the miR-128 regulation network.
CBFβ-SMMHC (core-binding factor β-smooth muscle myosin heavy chain), the fusion protein generated by the chromosome 16 inversion fusion gene, CBFB-MYH11, is known to initiate leukemogenesis. However, the mechanism through which CBFβ-SMMHC contributes to leukemia development is not well understood. Previously, it was proposed that CBFβ-SMMHC acts by dominantly repressing the transcription factor RUNX1 (Runt-related protein 1), but we recently showed that CBFβ-SMMHC has activities that are independent of RUNX1 repression. In addition, we showed that a modified CBFβ-SMMHC with decreased RUNX1-binding activity accelerates leukemogenesis. These results raise questions about the importance of RUNX1 in leukemogenesis by CBFβ-SMMHC. To test this, we generated mice expressing Cbfb-MYH11 in a Runx1-deficient background, resulting from either homozygous Runx1-null alleles (Runx1(-/-)) or a single dominant-negative Runx1 allele (Runx1(+/lz)). We found that loss of Runx1 activity rescued the differentiation defects induced by Cbfb-MYH11 during primitive hematopoiesis. During definitive hematopoiesis, RUNX1 loss also significantly reduced the proliferation and differentiation defects induced by Cbfb-MYH11. Importantly, Cbfb-MYH11-induced leukemia had much longer latency in Runx1(+/lz) mice than in Runx1-sufficient mice. These data indicate that Runx1 activity is critical for Cbfb-MYH11-induced hematopoietic defects and leukemogenesis.
In a patient with acute myeloid leukemia (AML) following therapy, finding ≥5% bone marrow (BM) blasts is highly concerning for residual/relapsed disease. Over an 18-month period, we performed multicolor flow cytometry immunophenotyping (MFC) for AML minimal residual disease on >4,000 BM samples, and identified 41 patients who had ≥5% myeloblasts by morphology but negative by MFC. At the time of a negative MFC study, an abnormal cytogenetic study converted to negative in 14 patients and remained positive at a low level (2.5-9.5%) by fluorescence in situ hybridization in 3 (14%), of the latter, abnormalities subsequently disappeared in the repeated BM in 2 patients. Positive pretreatment mutations, including FLT3, NPM1, IDH1, CEBPA, became negative in all 10 patients tested. Of the seven patients with favorable cytogenetics, PML/RARA, CBFB-MYH11 or RUNX1-RUNX1T1 fusion transcripts were detected at various levels in six patients but all patients remained in complete remission. With no additional chemotherapy given, 39 patients had BM repeated (median 2 weeks, range <1-21), and all cases showed <5% BM blasts and a continuously negative MFC. In the end of follow-up (median 10 months, range 1-22), 13 patients experienced relapse, 12/13 showing clonal cytogenetic evolution/switch and 11 demonstrating major immunophenotypic shifts. We conclude that MFC is useful in identifying a regenerating BM sample with ≥5% BM blasts that would otherwise be scored as positive using standard morphologic examination. We believe this conclusion is supported by the changes in molecular cytogenetic status and the patient clinical follow-up data.
Core-binding factor acute myeloid leukemia is a favorable acute myeloid leukemia subset cytogenetically defined by t(8;21) or inv(16)/t(16;16) rearrangements, disrupting RUNX1 (previously CBFA/AML1) or CBFB transcription factor functions. The receptor tyrosine kinase KIT is expressed in the vast majority of these acute myeloid leukemias and frequent activating KIT gene mutations have been associated with a higher risk of relapse. This phase II study aimed to evaluate dasatinib as maintenance therapy in patients with core-binding factor acute myeloid leukemia in first hematologic complete remission, but at higher risk of relapse due to molecular disease persistence or recurrence. A total of 26 patients aged 18-60 years old previously included in the CBF-2006 trial were eligible to receive dasatinib 140 mg daily if they had a poor initial molecular response (n=18) or a molecular recurrence (n=8). The tolerance of dasatinib as maintenance therapy was satisfactory. The 2-year disease-free survival in this high-risk population of patients was 25.7%. All but one patient with molecular recurrence presented subsequent hematologic relapse. Patients with slow initial molecular response had a similar disease-free survival when treated with dasatinib (40.2% at 2 years) or without any maintenance (50.0% at 2 years). The disappearance of KIT gene mutations at relapse suggests that clonal devolution may in part explain the absence of efficacy observed with single-agent dasatinib in these patients (n. EudraCT: 2006-006555-12).
In acute myeloid leukaemia (AML), the presence of t(8;21)(q22;q22) and inv(16)(p13q22)/t(16;16)(p13;q22) and/or the corresponding molecular rearrangements RUNX1/RUNX1T1 and CBFB/MYH11 [collectively referred to as core binding factor (CBF) AML] predict for a more favourable outcome in patients receiving cytarabine-anthracycline based induction and upon achievement of complete remission, high-dose cytarabine consolidation chemotherapy. However, 40-45% of these patients eventually relapse and die of their disease. Here, we review emerging molecular and therapeutic results that may be used to guide the clinical management of this subset of patients.
Integration of cytogenetic results with molecular genetic and epigenetic data refines the diagnosis, classification and risk-stratification of CBF AML. Clinical studies with targeting compounds (e.g. gemtuzumab ozogamicin, dasatinib) added to intensive chemotherapy appear beneficial both in younger and older patients, albeit the latter continue to have a significantly worse outcome than the former. Regularly molecular monitoring of disease during remission may provide a strategy for early therapeutic intervention before overt relapse.
Emerging evidence supports that novel diagnostic, treatment and molecular disease monitoring approaches may improve the prognosis of CBF AML.
APOBEC3 (apolipoprotein B mRNA editing enzyme catalytic polypeptide-like 3) proteins are cellular DNA deaminases that restrict a broad spectrum of lentiviruses. This process is counteracted by Vif (viral infectivity factor) of lentiviruses, which binds APOBEC3s and promotes their degradation. CBF-β (core binding factor subunit β) is an essential co-factor for the function of human immunodeficiency virus type 1 Vif to degrade human APOBEC3s. However, the requirement for CBF-β in Vif-mediated degradation of other mammalian APOBEC3 proteins is less clear. Here, we determined the sequence of feline CBFB and performed phylogenetic analyses. These analyses revealed that mammalian CBFB is under purifying selection. Moreover, we demonstrated that CBF-β is dispensable for feline immunodeficiency virus Vif-mediated degradation of APOBEC3s of its host. These findings suggested that primate lentiviruses have adapted to use CBF-β, an evolutionary stable protein, to counteract APOBEC3 proteins of their hosts after diverging from other lentiviruses.
